<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<a id="CHAPTER_X">CHAPTER X.</a>
			</h2>
			<p>We left Dr. Entwerfen in the last chapter uttering a very moral, if not a very new, exclamation on the vanity of human expectations; which had scarcely escaped from his lips, ere cruel Fate, resolving not to be accused in vain, supplied him with yet more abundant cause for lamentation. We have before mentioned, that the doctor had stumbled as he quitted the Pyramids, and that his friends raised him from the ground; but what was his consternation and dismay, when, on looking round to thank them, he found he was surrounded by armed men, who commanded him in the royal name to surrender! Sadly did the doctor turn his woeful eyes upon Edric, but, alas! he was in the same predicament as himself; and, in spite of their entreaties, they were marched off to prison, without being at all informed of what crime they had committed.</p>
			<p>Sadly passed the night, and gloomy dawned the day upon the unfortunate travellers, whose minds were harassed and bewildered by the extraordinary success of their awful experiment, and whose misery was infinitely increased by the suspense they had to suffer, both on account of their ignorance of the crime of which they were accused, and its probable punishment if they should be found guilty. Soon after daybreak, however, a summons for them arrived, and they were conducted as criminals before the same magistrate who, the day before, had treated them with such officious kindness.</p>
			<p>Very different, however, was the solemn judge who, clothed in all the insignia of magisterial dignity, now sate upon the bench, from the easy, good-tempered gentleman of the Pyramids; and the unlucky travellers saw, in an instant, that they were not likely to experience any favour from their previous acquaintance with him. The court was thronged with people, and the prisoners saw that they were regarded with curiosity, mingled with horror and supernatural fear. It is not agreeable to feel oneself an object of disgust to any one; and though Edric magnanimously and frequently repeated to himself that it was quite indifferent to him what such ignorant wretches as Egyptians thought of him; yet, if he would have avowed the truth, he would have been quite as well contented to have found himself the object of their admiration instead of their hatred; and he would have been very glad to have been safely at home again; whilst the doctor openly and loudly lamented the much regretted comforts of his own dear delightful study at Sir Ambrose’s. Little time, however, was allowed for reflection; for as soon as the prisoners were placed at the bar their examination commenced.</p>
			<p>“So, gentlemen!” said the learned judge, “you stand convicted⁠—no, I mean accused, of a most horrible, heinous, and sacrilegious offence⁠—an offence that makes our hair start with horror from our heads, and every separate lock rise up in vengeance against you.” The justice paused, that the prisoners might admire his eloquence; but, alas! such was the absorbing nature of self-love, that they were only thinking of what was going to be done with them, and to what this terrible exordium was likely to lead. After a short pause, Edric, supposing they were expected to speak, addressed the judge, and begged to know of what crime they were accused.</p>
			<p>“We are strangers,” said he, “and gentlemen. We were attracted to your country by an account of the wonders it contained; we declared our purposes openly; we have affected no concealment; and we have done nothing we need blush to avow⁠—”</p>
			<p>A confused murmur ran through the court as he spoke, expressive of the utmost disgust and abhorrence; Edric felt indignant, and he looked round proudly as he added:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Yes, I repeat we have done nothing we need blush to avow, and nothing derogatory to our characters as Englishmen and gentlemen.”</p>
			<p>“Sorcerers! wizards! demons in disguise!” cried the crowd. “Down with them! burn them! guillotine them! destroy them!”</p>
			<p>“Is this fair? is this generous?” asked Edric. “If we have done wrong, let our crime be proved, and we are ready to submit to any punishment you may think proper to inflict; but do not condemn us unheard. In England, every man is deemed innocent until he be proved guilty. You boast of having imported and improved upon all the useful regulations of the mother country, and cannot surely have omitted her most glorious law. Let us then have a fair trial, and God forbid that the course of justice should be impeded.”</p>
			<p>“You talk well, Sir,” said the judge; “but it’s of no use here. My chair, Sir, is made of witch-elm, and the whole court is lined with consecrated wood; so you may take your familiars to another market, for here they will avail you nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Good God!” exclaimed Edric, wringing his hands, “what ignorance! what gross superstition! And yet, in this man’s power are our lives!”</p>
			<p>“Oh! oh!” said the judge, who saw his despair, though he did not exactly know the cause; “I have brought you to, have I? Yes, yes; I tell you, no incantations will be of any avail here; and so, clerk, call the witnesses⁠—”</p>
			<p>The first person examined was the man who had been left in charge of the balloon, and he deposed as follows:⁠—“Why, Sir,” said he, scratching his head, as though he supposed wisdom dwelt in his fingers, and that their touch might give a little to his brain, “your honour told me to call out the <i>posse comitatus</i>, and set a guard of constables over the gentlemen’s whirligig; but I thought as how, seeing it was but a queer-looking thing, and not likely to tempt anybody to steal it, I might as well save the gentlemen from throwing their money away upon a parcel of idle fellows, and keep watch over it myself.”</p>
			<p>“And so get the reward instead of them,” observed the judge.</p>
			<p>“Why, your honour,” said the fellow, grinning, “I thought they might give something that might do <i>me</i> some good, but that it would be nothing amongst so many.”</p>
			<p>“Very true!” remarked the judge; “Go on Gregory.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” continued Gregory, “as I was sitting there, thinking of nothing at all, and somehow, I believe, I had fallen into a bit of a doze, I heard a queer sort of a buzzing, and I opened my eyes, and there I saw the gentlemen’s whirligig buzzing and puffing like a steam-engine on fire, and i’ th’ midst o’ the smoke I’ll take my oath I saw the mummy of King Cheops as plain as I see his worship there sitting in his throne.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” groaned the horror-struck crowd; “Oh!” groaned the judge and jury.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” continued the man; “I’ll take my oath, if it was the last word I had to speak, that I saw him there vomiting fire, and his big eyes flaring like a fiery furnace.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” groaned the judge, crowd, and jury, a degree louder than before.</p>
			<p>“And then,” resumed Gregory, “something went whiz, and off it all fled together like a flash of lightning⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” shrieked the whole court, in a convulsion of horror. Some of the fair sex in particular, screamed and covered their faces, as though they feared the next exploit of the redoubtable magicians would be to blow up the court, and send them all flying after the resuscitated mummy.</p>
			<p>“With your permission, Sir,” said Edric, as soon as the tumult had somewhat abated, “this proves nothing against either my friend or myself. We are, in fact, injured by it, and we have a claim against you instead of your being able to substantiate a charge against us. We left our balloon, containing valuable articles, and money to a considerable amount, in your charge, or, at least, in the custody of a man whom you recommended. When we quitted the Pyramid, we, of course, inquired for our balloon⁠—it had vanished; and instead of making us amends for our loss, you throw us into prison and tell us a wild, extravagant story of the disappearance of our property, which no man in his senses can possibly believe.”</p>
			<p>Another confused murmur, though very different in its character from the former, ran through the court on the conclusion of this speech; and the judge, if such an expression be not profane when speaking of a representative of justice, looked most excessively foolish.</p>
			<p>“Had not your worship better call the other witnesses?” whispered the clerk, pitying the dilemma of his principal.</p>
			<p>“True, true!” said the Lycurgus of Anglo-Egypt; “your observation is premature, young man; when the case has been proved against you, it will be time enough for you to think of your defence.”</p>
			<p>Edric bowed assent, and the examination continued. The guide was the next witness.</p>
			<p>“Well, Samuel,” said the judge; “what do you know about this matter?”</p>
			<p>“Why, Sir,” replied Samuel, “ye see, my dame and I were sitting by the fire, and we’d got a black pudding, as we was a going to have for our dinners. And so says dame, ‘I likes it cut in slices and fried,’ and so says I⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hold, fellow!” cried the judge, with great dignity. “Don’t abuse the patience of the Court. We have nothing to do with your dame or the black pudding; it is quite irrelevant to the matter now before us. Go on.”</p>
			<p>But Samuel could not go on; and, like his predecessor in the witness-box, he only stood still and scratched his head.</p>
			<p>“Why don’t you speak, fellow?” asked the clerk.</p>
			<p>“Because I doesn’t know what to say,” replied Samuel.</p>
			<p>“You must tell all you know about this affair,” pursued the clerk.</p>
			<p>“But I doesn’t know where to begin!” rejoined the perplexed witness; “his worship says it is not reverent.”</p>
			<p>“Begin with the Pyramid,” said the judge; “and, if you can, give a clear account of all that happened after you left the old passage by the moveable block in the wall that was last discovered.”</p>
			<p>“Why I can’t say there was any thing very particular happened, as I know of, Sir,” said Samuel, “after that, till we got to the shaft, and then we went down, Sir, you know, as we always does, till we came to the tomb of King Cheops; and then I turned the gentlemen in by themselves, as we always does, for the ‘fect, as Parson Snorum calls it. And then I sits me down i’ the vault, to wait for ’em, and I’d just rolled myself up, and was dozed asleep, when I hears such a noise as if the Pyramids were all coming tumbling about my ears. So up I jumped and rubbed my eyes, for I did not know very well where I was; and then I saw something that seemed to strike the torches out of the hands of the two great sitting figures, and put them out; and then I saw a great tall figure come gliding by me; and when he came up to the light, I saw his great flaming eyes; and then I fell upon my knees, and he laid hold of my shoulder and griped it. Look, your honour!” laying bare his shoulder as he spoke, and showing the deeply indented marks of the bony fingers of the Mummy. Again a groan of horror and indignation ran through the Court; and when another witness proved that the sarcophagus of Cheops had been examined, and was found empty, the judge seemed to think it was a clear case, and called triumphantly upon Edric for his defence.</p>
			<p>“I do not see that what has been proved,” said Edric, shuddering in spite of himself, “can affect either my tutor or myself. These people say that a mummy has revived, and, quitting the Pyramid in which he had been so long immured, has flown away with our balloon: but, supposing the tale to be true, what proof have you that we were at all implicated in the business? We were in the Pyramid, it is true; but so was also this man, whom you have brought forward as a witness against us. Supposing it was the intervention of some human aid that roused the Mummy from its tomb⁠—a fact, by the way, by no means proved, why may not he be the agent instead of us? What is there to fix the charge against us? Have we gained any thing by the adventure? Have we not, on the contrary, been serious losers by it? Where is our balloon, and the valuable articles it contained? If we are wizards, it must be confessed that we are very foolish ones; for we have lost our property, and thrown ourselves into prison, without reaping the smallest possible advantage! And if we have the power you seem to attribute to us, why do we stay here to be questioned, when we might so easily fly away in a flame of fire, or turn you all to statues, and walk quietly off without your being able to follow us?”</p>
			<p>Every one shuddered, and many turned pale at this speech, seeming to fear that Edric was about to put his suggestions into execution; whilst the judge seemed posed, and in vast perplexity as to what he had better determine;⁠—and the people were dreadfully afraid, lest they might, after all, lose the edifying spectacle of of an <i>auto-da-fé</i>, for which they had been so impatiently longing.</p>
			<p>Edric marked the hesitation of the judge, and endeavoured to improve it to his own advantage.⁠—“For my part,” continued he, “I am a British subject, and as such, under the protection of my own Court; my Sovereign has a consul here, and to him I make my appeal. I am neither ignoble, nor unknown in my own country⁠—my name is Montagu, and I am brother to the celebrated general of that family⁠—whose victories, no doubt, have reached even this remote province!”</p>
			<p>“My dear Mr. Montagu!” said the judge, “I really beg your pardon: why did you not acquaint me sooner with your dignity? I dare say there is no truth at all in the charge:⁠—only assure me upon your honour that you did not touch the mummy, and that you know nothing of what is become of it at present, and I will instantly order you to be set at liberty.”</p>
			<p>“I certainly do not know what is become of it,” replied Edric. “But⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No!” interrupted Dr. Entwerfen, coming forward with the air of a determined martyr, “I will not suffer such equivocation.⁠—I would rather perish at the stake, than disavow, for a moment, my opinions, or betray the sacred interests of science with which I feel I am entrusted. No, Sir! my pupil cannot make the public declaration you require. I know he would not⁠—and he cannot if he would;⁠—on the contrary, I avow the fact. We came here for the express purpose of endeavouring to resuscitate the mummy of Cheops, and I glory in the proud thought that we have succeeded.” (A groan of horror.) “Yes, Sir, I do not hesitate to avow openly, that the grand object of my life, for several successive years, has been to detect in what consisted the strange, inexplicable secret of life. We live, Sir, we die: we are born, and we are buried: we know that time, sickness, or violence, may kill us; but who can say in what the mysterious principle of life consists? Various theories have been broached, with which, no doubt, a gentleman of your intelligence and extensive information is well acquainted;⁠—and life has been successively stated to depend upon the heart, the brain, the circulation of the blood, and the respiration of the lungs. All, however, are fallacious; the heart has been wounded, and the brain has been removed, and yet the patient has lived, whilst the operations of respiration and circulation have been kept up for hours, in a body from which the vital spirit had departed. Weighing all these and divers other arguments in my mind, it has struck me, and indeed I may say, that after mature deliberation, I have confidently arrived at the conclusion, that both the faculties which we call life and soul depend entirely upon the nervous system. Do not all philosophers agree that we receive ideas merely through the medium of the senses? And can our senses be operated upon otherwise than through the influence of the nerves? Ergo, the nerves alone convey ideas and sensations to the mind⁠—or rather, the nerves alone are the mind. Not a single instance, I believe, is known in which life remained after the sensorium had been destroyed, or even seriously injured. What then can be more simple than to suppose life resides there? Pursuing this idea, I have long been convinced that where the nervous system remained uninjured, and the appearance of death was only occasioned by a suspension of the operation of the animal functions, that life might be restored, if, by the intervention of any powerful agency, the nervous system could be excited to re-action; and as this, of course, could not be effected where any kind of decomposition had taken place, it appeared to me that a mummy was the only body upon which the experiment could be tried with the least prospect of success. From various circumstances, however, it has never till now been in my power to realize my wishes on this head; but for a few weeks past, my pupil has entertained similar longings to myself; and yesterday saw our hopes accomplished. Yes; I flatter myself there cannot now remain a shadow of doubt to the world, that, in ordinary cases, before decomposition has taken place, that resuscitation is not only possible, but probable, and that dead bodies may be easily restored to life.”</p>
			<p>The horror and consternation produced by this extraordinary speech, amongst the Anglo-Egyptians who heard it, far exceeded any human powers of description. Their terror at what they considered as the doctor’s daring impiety, being considerably augmented by their not understanding above one-tenth part of what he said⁠—and when he had finished, there was a dead pause which no one dared to interrupt, till a sudden gust of wind happening to blow open the door of the justice’s retiring-room, the terrified crowd fell back aghast one upon another, pale and trembling, as though they absolutely expected his Infernal Majesty to appear before them in <i>propriâ personâ</i>.</p>
			<p>When tranquillity was in some degree restored, the judge ordered the prisoners to be reconducted to prison.</p>
			<p>“After the dangerous and impious speech we have just heard,” said he, “it would be madness to trust such suspected persons at large; and yet, I would willingly take time to consider the case, and to ascertain whether this young man be indeed the person he represents himself; as, I own, I should be sorry to inflict the full penalty of the law upon the brother of her Britannic Majesty’s Commander-in-chief.”</p>
			<p>Remonstrance was useless, and the prisoners were again conducted to their dungeon where they were heavily chained, and left to ruminate upon the calamities that had befallen them. Far from agreeable were these meditations; for Edric was too angry with the doctor’s ill-timed candour to be inclined to speak; and the doctor was too much ashamed of the effect already produced by his eloquence, to wish to make any farther display of it. At length, as his eyes became accustomed to the faint glimmering light admitted into the dungeon, he perceived the wall to which he was chained was covered with hieroglyphics, and endeavoured to divert his chagrin by examining them.</p>
			<p>“I congratulate you, Sir,” said Edric, when he perceived this, feeling rather indignant at his tutor’s coolness⁠—“I congratulate you most sincerely upon your philosophy, and most earnestly do I wish that I could imitate it.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, Edric!” returned the doctor, “all men are not equally gifted.”</p>
			<p>“With either the art of making blunders, or forgetting them,” said Edric pointedly.</p>
			<p>“These hieroglyphics are very curious,” observed the doctor, who had his own reasons for not wishing to pursue the subject; “see how beautifully the ancient Egyptians worked in granite. The fine polish they contrived to give this hard substance would be perfectly astonishing, if we did not recollect that they always edged their tools with emerald dust.”</p>
			<p>“Humph!” said Edric, in a tone which seemed to imply “and what does it matter to me if they did?” The doctor, however, was unabashed, and continued: “You see, as usual, the figure of the bull is frequently repeated here. This wall is evidently built of stones gathered from some ancient ruin. By the way, Edric, I don’t think I ever explained to you why the ancient Egyptians chose a bull as one of their deities, or, rather, as their principal one. You know, that anciently the year began in Taurus, though, by the precession of the equinox, it has now advanced past Aries. Well, as the ancient Egyptians found that the sun began its career in Taurus, what could be more natural than that they should identify a bull with the vivifying principle? The same theory may account for that legend of the Chaldeans, which supposes the world to have been produced by a bull’s striking chaos with his horn⁠—which horn, by the way, was probably the origin of the fable of Amalthea, or the Horn of Plenty.”</p>
			<p>Edric made no reply, and the doctor dreading a pause, which might give his pupil an opportunity of upbraiding him, went on:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Though the Egyptians had a number of divinities, they clearly worshipped only two, viz. the principles of good and evil. Osiris, Isis, Cneph, Phath, Horus, and all their host of inferior deities, were clearly types of the first, and light and life were their essence; whilst Typhon, Campsa, and the malignant deities, exemplified the second, and their attributes were invariably darkness and death.”</p>
			<p>“For Heaven’s sake!” cried Edric, “say no more upon the subject, for it is not in the power of language to describe the horror I have at the mere thought of any thing Egyptian. Let us escape from this fearful country, and I most sincerely hope nothing may ever happen to recall even its recollection to my imagination.”</p>
			<p>“Such and so changeable are the desires of human life!” said the doctor. “But a few short weeks since, Egypt was the goal of your wishes, and the prospect of re-animating a corpse⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh! do not mention it!” cried Edric, shuddering. “Oh God! how justly am I punished, by the very fulfilment of my unhallowed hopes!⁠—even now the fearful eyes of that hideous Mummy seem to glare upon me; and even now I feel the gripe of its horrid bony fingers on my arm!”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, no doubt,” exclaimed the doctor, “he pinched hard. He was a king, and kings should have strong arms, you know.”</p>
			<p>“For God’s sake! do not jest upon such a subject,” returned Edric; “a subject so wild and fearful, that I can still scarcely believe but that all which has passed was a dream.”</p>
			<p>“If it be,” said the doctor, “it is one from which I freely avow I should be very happy to awake, for I must confess this prison is not at all to my taste.”</p>
			<p>“And yet, is it not your fault⁠—?” began Edric.</p>
			<p>“Recrimination, Edric, is always folly,” interrupted the doctor, who did not now feel very proud of the part he had acted before the magistrate, nor very anxious to have it alluded to;⁠—“and instead of losing time in regretting past errors, it is the part of a wise man to endeavour to find means of remedying them, and avoiding them in future.”</p>
			<p>“Agreed!” returned Edric; “and as I presume you are now convinced your learned dissertation on the probable seat of human life was, to say the least, ill-timed, we will drop the subject. But, even if we get out of prison, what is to become of us? Our money and valuables were all in the balloon; and here we are, in a foreign country, entirely destitute.”</p>
			<p>“Not entirely, Edric⁠—not entirely!” cried the doctor, a glow of satisfaction spreading itself again over his face; “no, no; I have guarded against that; ah, what a thing it is to have foresight! Well! some persons are certainly singularly gifted in that line, and it is a happy thing for you that you have somebody to think for you. See here!” displaying the things as he spoke; “here is a bed, bolster, and pillows, ready for inflation; a portable bedstead, linen, soap, pens, ink, paper, candles, fire, knives, forks, spoons, and money; all snugly packed up in my walking-stick!”</p>
			<p>“Your supporter,” returned Edric, smiling, “as you used to call it; and as it now seems likely to prove, in more senses than one.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes!” cried the doctor, “let us only get out of prison, and all the rest will be easy.”</p>
			<p>“But that only, doctor.”</p>
			<p>“Of that we must take time to consider.”</p>
			<p>“Well, it is some comfort that we are likely to be allowed time enough, as my hint respecting the British consul did not seem thrown away upon the judge. Oh, doctor, if you had not spoken!”</p>
			<p>“Why, surely you would not have given him the declaration he required?”</p>
			<p>“There was no occasion. He neither wished nor expected more than I had already said. After what I had mentioned of my family, he only wished a decent pretext for setting us at liberty.”</p>
			<p>“At any rate,” said the doctor, by way of changing the subject, “you see my doctrine is proved completely by the resuscitation of the mummy, for it must have been perfectly restored to life and consciousness, or it could not have flown away with the balloon.”</p>
			<p>“For my part,” returned Edric, “I can scarcely believe what has occurred to be real: there must be some deception. And yet, by whom can a deception have been practised, and for what purpose? In short, I am quite bewildered.”</p>
			<p>The doctor being much in the same condition, could only sympathize with his pupil; and in this state we must leave them, whilst we inquire respecting the mysterious object of their speculations.</p>
			<p>The mummy thus strangely recalled to life, was indeed Cheops! and horrible were the sensations that throbbed through every nerve as returning consciousness brought with it all the pangs of his former existence, and renewed circulation thrilled through every vein. His first impulse was to quit the tomb in which he had been so long immured, and seek again the regions of light and day. Instinct seemed to guide him to this; for, as yet, a mist hung over his faculties, and ideas thronged in painful confusion through his mind, which he was incapable of either arranging or analyzing.</p>
			<p>When however he reached the plain, light and air seemed to revive him and restore his scattered senses; and gazing wildly around he exclaimed, “Where am I? what place is this? Methinks all seems wondrous, new, and strange! Where is my father? And where! oh, where, is my Arsinoë? Alas, alas!” continued he wildly; “I had forgotten⁠—I hoped it was a dream, a fearful dream, for methinks I have been long asleep. Was it, indeed, reality? Are all, all gone? And was that hideous scene true?⁠—those horrors that still haunt my memory like a ghastly vision? Speak! speak!” continued he, his voice rising in thrilling energy as he spoke⁠—“speak! let me hear the sound of another’s voice, before my brain is lost in madness. Have I entered Hades, or am I still on earth?⁠—yes, yes, it is still the earth, for there the mighty Pyramid, I caused to be erected, towers behind me. Yet where is Memphis? where my forts and palaces? What a dark, smoky mass of buildings now surrounds me!⁠—Can this be the once proud Queen of Cities? Oh, no! I see no palaces, no temples⁠—Memphis is fallen. The mighty barrier that protected her splendour from the waste of waters, must have been swept away by the encroaching inroads of the swelling Nile. But is this the Nile?” continued he, looking wildly upon the river; “sure I must be deceived. It is the fatal river of the dead. No papyrine boats glide smoothly on its surface; but strange, infernal vessels, vomiting forth volumes of fire and smoke. Holy Osiris, defend me! where am I? where have I been? A misty veil seems thrown upon the face of nature. Awake, awake!” cried he, with a scream of agony; “set me free; I did not mean to slay him!” Then throwing himself violently upon the ground, he lay for some moments, apparently insensible. Then slowly rising, he looked at himself, and a deep, unnatural shuddering convulsed his whole frame. His sensations of identity became confused, and he recoiled with horror from himself: “These are the trappings of a mummy!” murmured he in a hollow whisper. “Am I then dead?” The next instant, however, he broke into a wild laugh of derision:⁠—“Poor, feeble wretch!” cried he; “what do I fear?⁠—Need <i>I</i> tremble, in whose bosom dwells everlasting fire? No⁠—no! let me rather rejoice. I cannot be more wretched; why then should I dread a change? I should rather welcome it with transport, and bravely dare my fate.”</p>
			<p>At this moment the car of the balloon caught his eye: “Ah! what is that?” cried he; “I am summoned! ’Tis the boat of Hecate, ready to ferry me across the Mærian Lake, to learn my final doom. I come! I come! I fear no judgment! My hell is here!” and, striking his bosom, leaped into the car, and stamped violently against its sides.</p>
			<p>At this instant Gregory awoke; his terror was not surprising. The dried, distorted features of the Mummy looked yet more hideous than before, when animated by human passions; and his deep hollow voice, speaking in a language he did not understand, fell heavily upon his ear, like the groans of fiends. Gregory tried to scream, but he could not utter a sound. He attempted to fly, but his feet seemed nailed to the spot on which he stood, and he remained with his eyes fixed upon the Mummy, gasping for breath, while a cold sweat distilled from every pore. In the mean time, Cheops had stumbled over the box containing the apparatus for making inflammable air, and striking it violently, had unintentionally set the machinery in motion. The pipes, tubes, and bellows, instantly began to work; and the Indian-rubber bottle became gradually inflated, till it swelled to an enormous magnitude, and fluttered in the air like an imprisoned bird, beating itself against the massive walls to which it was still attached.</p>
			<p>“Still it goes not,” cried Cheops, again stamping impatiently. The quicksilver vapour bottle had fallen beneath his feet, and it broke as he trod upon it. The vapour burst from it with inconceivable violence, and tearing the balloon from its fastenings, sent it off through the air, like an arrow darting from a bow.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
