<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<a id="CHAPTER_<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>">CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>.</a>
			</h2>
			<p>The tumult had now nearly subsided. The late busy crowd had flown, uttering shrieks of horror and dismay; and of all the countless mass of human beings that had so lately thronged around, none now remained but Edmund and Father Morris, who supported Claudia; and the Duke and Henry Seymour, who still remained near the insensible form of Elvira; the eyes of all being chained, as though by magic, upon the horrid vision before them; whilst they, pale and immovable as the sculptured marble of the tomb, waited in fearful expectation of what was next to happen, and scarcely dared to move or breathe; the solemn silence that prevailed being only broken by the convulsive gasps of the expiring Queen:⁠—an awful change from the busy hum of thousands which had so lately filled the air!</p>
			<p>“Where am I?” exclaimed Cheops, gazing wildly around⁠—his deep sepulchral voice thrilling through every nerve:⁠—“Where is Arsinoë? Where is she? They seize her! They tear her from me! Curses on the wretches!⁠—May Typhon’s everlasting vengeance pursue them with its fury, and may their hearts wither, gnawed by the never-dying snake!”</p>
			<p>The Mummy gnashed his teeth as he spoke, and the gloom that gathered on his dark brow grew black as night. All shuddered as that horrid glance of eternal hatred seemed to freeze their blood. They turned away involuntarily; and when they looked again, the spectre had disappeared. The shattered remains of the balloon lay before them; for happening to cross London just at the moment of the greatest confusion, it had become entangled in the crowd, and, notwithstanding the strong material of which it was composed, had been rent asunder in the scuffle, and had fallen with its fearful occupier to the ground.</p>
			<p>“Good God!” cried Father Morris, after a short pause; “what a horrid vision! what can it mean?”</p>
			<p>“It seemed an Egyptian Mummy,” said Edmund, shuddering; “and it spoke that language. But what can have resuscitated it? What human power can have recalled to life, a being so long immured in the silent tomb!”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps the vehicle he came in may contain something to explain the mystery,” said Henry Seymour.</p>
			<p>At this moment several persons ran past screaming with terror, and exclaiming that they had seen a demon. When the confusion excited by these trembling fugitives had a little subsided, a few of the courtiers began also to make their appearance, and return to their posts near the Queen. But all were pale, and they started at every sound, seeming ready, at the least alarm, to take flight again as expeditiously as before.</p>
			<p>Claudia still lay insensible; her heaving chest and deep convulsive sobs for breath, alone betraying signs of life. But her fate no longer excited the deep, overwhelming interest it had done before. Whispers of wonder and superstitious horror mingled with the hopes and fears inspired by her danger; and her removal to the palace was almost regarded with indifference, so completely were the minds of men occupied by the strange spectacle they had so lately witnessed.</p>
			<p>Everyone, indeed, neither thought nor spoke of anything but the Mummy; and a thousand rumours, each more extravagant than the last, spread from mouth to mouth respecting it. Men stood in groups whispering to each other, and scarcely daring to stir without a companion: nay, even then, creeping from place to place, looking cautiously around, and starting at every noise, as though they feared the awful visitor was returned: whilst the sages of the country gravely shook their heads, and declared that what had taken place was evidently a visitation from Heaven, in punishment of the sins of mankind. An indefinable presentiment of evil hung over the spirits of all. Gloom, indeed, spread through every class of society: all dreaded they knew not what⁠—and all shrunk with horror from the thought of supernatural agency. There is an invincible feeling implanted by Nature in the mind of man, which makes him shudder with disgust at anything that invades her laws.</p>
			<p>The body of the Queen being removed, attended by her physicians and the ladies of her household, the rest of the assembled courtiers gathered round the balloon; and exclamations of terror and surprise broke from their lips when they discovered it to be the same in which Edric and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Entwerfen had so short a time before taken their departure for Egypt. The whole truth now seemed to flash upon them.</p>
			<p>“I thought how it would be,” said Lord Maysworth; “you know I told you, Lord Gustavus, that in my opinion it was an expedition that could never possibly do any good⁠—but you were of a different belief.”</p>
			<p>“My Lord,” returned Lord Gustavus, solemnly, “thinking as I think, and as I am convinced everyone who hears me must think, or at least ought to think, it is my deliberate opinion, that the expedition of my youthful friend and his learned tutor was both admirably planned and well concocted, and that if it have failed in its ulterior object, it has been solely owing to some of those unforeseen events which sometimes do occur even in the best regulated arrangements, and which it was utterly impossible for any human ability entirely to ward off and avert.”</p>
			<p>“Edric’s balloon! Impossible!” cried Sir Ambrose, rushing forward to ascertain the fact, and forgetting all his anger against his son in his anxiety for his fate. “Yes! yes!” continued he, looking at some of the things, as they were drawn forth and exhibited by different persons in the crowd; “those were Edric’s books⁠—that was his desk. Oh! my son! my son! what is become of him?”</p>
			<p>Many sympathized with the unfortunate father, and more eagerly questioned each other as to the probable meaning of what they saw. No one, however, could give any explanation; and all was confusion and dismay. The bosom of Edmund, after the first moment of excitation had passed, was racked with anguish too bitter to allow him to feel curious even to know his brother’s fate. But a few hours before, love and fortune seemed to unite in showering their choicest blessings upon his head, and now he was the most wretched of mankind; for if Claudia died, Rosabella or Elvira must be queen; and if Elvira should be chosen, all hopes of becoming her husband must be lost.</p>
			<p>“Oh, God!” cried he, striking his forehead in agony, “why was I reserved for this? Why did I not perish fighting the battles of my country? And why was I saved only to be mocked with the hope of happiness, which, just as it seemed within my grasp, flies from me forever? Wretch that I am! would that I had been never born, or at least had died in my nurse’s arms, and thus escaped the tormenting pangs that now drive me to distraction!”</p>
			<p>Whilst Edmund thus raved, the eye of Rosabella followed his every movement, and seemed with a fiend-like pleasure to exult in his agonies. “I am avenged,” thought she; “he now feels what I have so often suffered. But this is not all; he must be probed to the quick ere he can know the bitter vengeance of a woman scorned.”</p>
			<p>Whilst these violent emotions were convulsing the bosoms of all around, the old duke knelt by the side of Elvira, gazing upon her with the most intense anxiety. Her gentle and feminine nature had been overpowered at seeing the blood of Claudia, and she still lay insensible, looking more exquisitely lovely than fancy can conceive. The beauty of Elvira was of the most soft and feminine description; long silken eyelashes shaded her dark hazel eyes, and gave them an expression more voluptuous than brilliant, whilst nothing could exceed the delicacy of her complexion, or the beauty of her full rosy lips. The figure of Elvira might not have served as the model of a courageous heroine, but it would have suited admirably for an Houri; and lovely as she always was, she had perhaps never looked more so than at this moment, as the returning blood softly retinted her cheeks, and her eyes gradually unclosed. Lord Edmund gazed upon her, till, maddened by the thought that he must lose her forever, he could no longer endure his own sensations, and, darting amongst the crowd, he endeavoured to fly from the world and from himself.</p>
			<p>The duke, on the contrary, saw the recovery of his daughter with unalloyed transport, for though he loved Edmund, and wished to have him for a son-in-law, he was by no means insensible to the prospect of seeing his daughter a Queen, and his breast throbbed with violent emotions, which had long been a stranger to it.</p>
			<p>In the meantime the Mummy had stalked solemnly through the city, urged more by instinct than design; the mist that still clung over him, making him seem like one wandering in a dream. Yet still he advanced; his path, like that of a destroying angel, spreading consternation as he went, and all he met flying horror-stricken from his sight: many, however, when the monster had passed, crept softly back to gaze after him, and amongst this number was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu, in whose breast curiosity, that vice of low minds, reigned predominant.</p>
			<p>The whole family had reached home in perfect safety, the lady herself hurrying her return, the moment the accident of the Queen was made known: lest, as she said, in the confusion that might ensue, her servants might be induced to leave her house, and some evil disposed personages might strip it of its contents. Urged by this prudent motive, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu had hastened home, and finding all safe, was just about to retire to rearrange her disordered dress, when one of the servants rushed into the room with the account of a fearful spirit having been seen in the Strand, whose mysterious appearance, coupled with the singular accident that had happened to the Queen, seemed to portend some dreadful calamity that was about to fall upon the country.</p>
			<p>“What is it like?” asked <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu; “have you seen it, Evelina?”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, ma’am!” cried the panting girl; “its eyes flare like fire, and it stares so wildly round it! and as it went along it saw a dead cat lying in the street; and it knelt down and took the creature up, and kissed it, and lamented over it in such a strange way, and in such a strange language! I never heard anything like it in my life.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, dear! I should like to see it!” cried <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu, flying to the door, and holding it half open to secure a retreat in case of necessity. Just as she reached the street, however, fate, as though willing to gratify her curiosity, occasioned the Mummy to turn back; and with that kind of half pleasure and half pain, with which the good people of England sometimes delight to gaze upon anything horrible, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu continued to look as it rapidly approached her dwelling, till, as it reached the door, to her infinite horror it stalked towards it. Awestruck and trembling, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu retreated. The Mummy followed her. He stretched his hand out to her. She shrunk back aghast from his touch. “Lead on!” cried he with a voice of thunder. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu could bear no more, and she fled screaming to the parlour, where her husband was already lost in some of his beloved calculations.</p>
			<p>Absent as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu generally was, however, he was roused by this unexpected intrusion, and the blood ran chilly through his veins, as he saw the tall majestic figure of Cheops stride across the apartment. His athletic stature, his dark swarthy complexion, and his strongly marked features, aided by the fearful lustre of his piercing eyes, gave to his figure, swathed as it yet was in the vestments of the grave, a supernatural grandeur that thrilled through every nerve of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu’s frame, and he shrunk back with horror as his fearful guest stalked past him.</p>
			<p>Cheops saw his terror, and smiled in proud disdain as he threw himself upon a couch, placed near a window looking upon the garden, which, as we have before stated, shelved down to the river. There he lay, his eyes fixed upon the majestic Thames, whilst <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu gazed with trembling limbs and pallid lips at their strange guest, without daring either to approach or disturb him.</p>
			<p>“Thus have I watched the Nile,” said Cheops, his awful voice sounding as from the tomb, “whilst the gently rising waters have gradually swelled into the flood which was to pour joy and plenty over the land:⁠—and thus, too, have I lain, gazing upon its streams, when, the purpose of all-bounteous Nature having been fulfilled, it has sunk back, slowly retiring to its natural bed. But, oh! how different were the feelings that then throbbed in my breast, to the corroding fire that now consumes me!⁠—Oh! Osiris! what horrid thoughts flash through my brain!⁠—they come like overwhelming floods pouring from heaven to the great deep, sweeping all before them in one mighty ruin.⁠—Oh! Arsinoë! by the fell rites of Typhon, there’s madness in the thought!”</p>
			<p>Then springing from the couch, his eyes glared with yet fiercer brilliancy as he flashed them round, whilst <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu, terrified beyond the power of expression, flew towards the door, eyeing the motions of their dangerous guest with feelings of unspeakable horror. The storm of passions in the breast of Cheops, however, though tremendous, seemed soon allayed; for ere many moments had elapsed, he sank again upon the couch in a kind of lethargy, which, if it were not slumber, seemed at least to imply a temporary cessation from pain.</p>
			<p>“Thank God!” whispered <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, as he motioned to his wife to creep out of the apartment. She tremblingly obeyed; and the moment she thought herself in safety, she threw herself upon her knees, and thanked God with more fervour than she had ever done before in her whole life; whilst the servants, who were all assembled in the anteroom, crowded round her, trembling and with pallid cheeks and white lips, clustering together like bees swarming round their queen.</p>
			<p>“Oh, madam! madam!” exclaimed Angelina, in a whisper, “what will become of us? A serous moisture transudes from every pore in my body with the chilliness of death, and my very hair erects itself with horror upon my head.”</p>
			<p>“And my heart throbs with such violence,” said Cecilia, “that the whole arterial system seems deranged.”</p>
			<p>“It is evidently an Egyptian Mummy,” observed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, and, as he seldom spoke, every word he uttered was listened to as an oracle. “Its language and its dress bespeak its origin, but by what strange event it has been resuscitated⁠—”</p>
			<p>At this moment a sharp knock at the door made the terrified servants all spring closer together, clinging to each other in an agony of nervous horror, and not one daring to approach the door. The knocking and ringing, however, at length became so violent, as to rouse even <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu to give the clamorous intruders entrance. It was Father Morris and Sir Ambrose.</p>
			<p>“Oh, my dear brother!” cried the latter, panting for breath; “have you heard the news? The strangest vision has appeared, and the Queen is certainly dying. Everyone says it is a demon.”</p>
			<p>“What, the Mummy?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu.</p>
			<p>“Have you heard of it then?” said Sir Ambrose eagerly.</p>
			<p>“It is now in this house,” cried <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu.</p>
			<p>“In this house!” repeated her brother-in-law; whilst Father Morris, who had looked pale and exhausted when he entered the hall, became still paler, and looked scarcely able to support himself.</p>
			<p>“To arms!” cried Cheops from the inner room; “the Palli are upon us! Cowards that we are, the enemy are at our gates!”</p>
			<p>Screaming, and scarcely knowing where they went, the terrified servants tumbled over each other in the hastiness of their retreat, huddling themselves together in a heap, yet keeping their eyes fixed upon the door from which they expected the spectre to appear, as though charmed by the fascination of a rattlesnake.</p>
			<p>A loud crash now produced a fresh scream; then all was still. After a long pause, which seemed of endless duration, Father Morris, evidently with a dreadful effort, roused himself and advanced⁠—</p>
			<p>“Death itself is not so horrid as this suspense,” said he, as he resolutely threw open the door of the room, which had contained the Mummy, and entered it. It was empty⁠—but the broken framework of the window seemed to point out in what manner the awful visitor had made his exit.</p>
			<p>It was with infinite difficulty that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu could be persuaded to return to the room; and when she did, the remainder of the day was passed by her, and every inhabitant of her mansion, in fear and trembling. When they spoke, it was in whispers, and when they moved, they crept along with stealthy noiseless steps, as though they feared the echo of their own footsteps: the eyes of all fixed timidly upon the broken window, through which the fearful stranger had disappeared.</p>
			<p>Slowly and heavily the hours rolled on, till the time appointed for dinner arrived: the servants, as they served the meal, looking timidly around, instead of regarding the dishes they carried in their hands, and the family scarcely daring to eat, and only speaking in whispers, whilst they started every moment, fancying the wild eyes of Cheops again glared upon them, and his deep hollow voice again rang in their ears; and their own tones sounded strangely hoarse and unnatural. Nothing, however, had terrified <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu so much as the laugh of Cheops; strange, wild, and unearthly, it still seemed to ring in her ears, like the yell of a demon; whilst, if anything that happened, chanced to recall the appalling sound, her limbs shook in every joint; her teeth chattered in her head; terror blanched her lips and cheeks to a ghastly paleness, and she seemed every instant upon the point of rising from her seat and flying shrieking from the room.</p>
			<p>In the meantime, the sensations these extraordinary events had created amongst the people were indescribable. Strange rumours and contradictory reports were circulated, and the most incredible stories invented of all that had passed. The minds of men became bewildered; they knew not what to credit nor what to think; a gloomy presentiment hung over them; they seemed to feel some fearful change was at hand, but scarcely knew what to hope or what to fear. Business was at a stand: people indeed gathered together in the shops, but it was only to whisper secretly to each other, strange mysterious stories of the late marvellous events, which they dared not breathe in public. The extremes of ignorance and civilization tend alike to produce credulity, and the wildest and most improbable stories were as greedily swallowed by the most enlightened people in the world, as they could have been even by a horde of uncultivated barbarians.</p>
			<p>The family of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu retired early to rest at the close of the eventful day we have been speaking of, hoping to lose in sleep the remembrance of the harassing events they had so lately witnessed. Lord Edmund had returned soon after the disappearance of the Mummy; but he had locked himself in his chamber, and had refused to see anyone, his mind being too much agitated for him to endure the common forms of society. All was soon quiet throughout the mansion.</p>
			<p>It was midnight when a tall figure wrapped in a large cloak, appeared slowly gliding with catlike steps through the garden of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu. It cautiously avoided the light, and crept along the shadiest walks and thickest allies, carefully shrouding itself from observation, and endeavouring, by availing itself of the shelter of the trees, the better to conceal its movements. It has been already stated that the garden of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu was only separated from that of the duke by a terrace very little used; the door, indeed, leading to it from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu’s premises, had been so long closed up, as to be nearly forgotten, and yet it was towards this unfrequented spot that the mysterious figure directed its course. The long neglected door slowly opened, and the stream of light it admitted, was obscured for a moment by a passing shade; and then all seemed dark, silent, and mysterious as before.</p>
			<p>“It certainly went that way,” said a voice, the preciseness of which marked it as belonging to Abelard; “and it was a real, tangible, material form, as I saw its shadow intercept the light when the door was opened and it passed through.”</p>
			<p>“It is quite impossible,” cried Evelina, one of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu’s housemaids, who having been induced by the inconstant butler to take a ramble with him by moonlight, had also witnessed this strange apparition; “you must be mistaken <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Abelard, for that door has not been opened this age. It is even nailed up, as you may see yourself if you examine it.”</p>
			<p>“It is very strange,” said Abelard, after he had tried the door and found it immovable; “I certainly saw it open.”</p>
			<p>“It must have been an optical delusion, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Abelard,” said Evelina; “the retina of the eye is sometimes strangely affected, and represents objects quite different to what they really are.”</p>
			<p>“I must consult Father Morris about it tomorrow,” resumed the butler; “for it was certainly the Mummy spectre.”</p>
			<p>“La! do you think so, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Abelard?” said Evelina, turning pale; “why then didn’t you speak to it.”</p>
			<p>“I will if it comes again,” returned Abelard.</p>
			<p>“Oh! there it is!” cried Evelina; and the worthy pair flew back to the house, screaming in concert, and without once daring to look behind them. Scarcely, however, had the last echo of their footsteps died away upon the ear, when the figure emerged from the recess in which it had lain concealed, and again crept slowly towards the door leading into the garden of the duke.</p>
			<p>“Hist! Marianne!” cried he, pausing for a reply; but all was still. “Marianne!” repeated he still louder⁠—“Fools! dolts! idiots!” continued he, stamping violently, as he still found his call of no avail; “they have kept me so long with their cursed folly, that she is gone. Eternal misery haunt them for their officious babbling. By Heaven! if they had had the sense to climb the wall, I had been lost:⁠—but hark, she comes!”</p>
			<p>The door now slowly opened, and a female figure holding a light appeared.</p>
			<p>“How is she?” cried the stranger.</p>
			<p>“Better,” returned the female.</p>
			<p>“Then it is past the power of man to kill her,” resumed the first; and rushing wildly past her he buried himself in the deepest recesses of the grove.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
