<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
			<p>The morning after the events just recorded, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, the brother of Sir Ambrose, was sitting at the breakfast-table with his wife and daughter, they were all startled by the unexpected arrival of a letter from Sir Ambrose. “Bless me!” cried <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, moved for once to forget his usual habits of indifference⁠—“I do believe it is a letter from my brother.”</p>
			<p>“Your brother!” screamed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu, starting up to examine it, and in her agitation overturning a patent steam coffee-machine, by which coffee was roasted, ground, made, and poured out with an <span xml:lang="la">ad libitum</span> of boiling milk and sugar, all in the short space of five minutes. “Oh!” continued she⁠—“I am scalded to death!”</p>
			<p>“I hope not, my dear,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, calmly taking up his letter, and carefully examining it on all sides without opening it. “Yes,” continued he, “it is indeed from my brother, and I hope it contains no ill news, for I do not perceive any signs of mourning about it.” And so saying, he very tranquilly laid his letter again upon the table, and recommenced sipping his coffee.</p>
			<p>“La! papa, hadn’t you better open your letter and read it?” asked Clara, who was busily employed in assisting her mother.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” resumed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu. “True! I never thought of that⁠—I think I had.” Then again taking the letter in his hand, he broke the seal and gave it to Clara to read.</p>
			<p>“And do you think my daughter is to leave me when I am in this miserable condition, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, to read letters from your brother, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu⁠—a man who has always treated me with such disrespect, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu⁠—and I half scalded to death!”</p>
			<p>“I am sure I’m very sorry, my dear,” began <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu.</p>
			<p>“Oh, spare your sorrow,” exclaimed his wife⁠—“for I’m sure you don’t care one single straw about me. You’re a cruel man⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hadn’t I better read the letter?” asked Clara, trembling at the thought of the domestic sparring she saw about to ensue.</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes! read, my dear,” said her father, glad of any pretext to avert the coming storm: for though he seldom disturbed himself about anything, provided his study was not swept oftener than once a month, and he was not obliged to submit to the insupportable fatigue of arranging his ideas in the tense form, necessary for conversation; he had yet a most inconceivable horror of his wife’s fluency of tongue, thus affording a striking proof of the ingratitude of mortals, who often ungraciously find fault with the very things for which they have most occasion to be thankful; as it must be allowed that nothing could really be more convenient for a man of a taciturn disposition, than to have a wife who could manage to talk at once for him and herself too.</p>
			<p>Notwithstanding the encouragement of her father, Clara, however, still paused, looking with a timid eye towards her mother, for that lady’s permission to begin. Curiosity struggled powerfully with anger in the breast of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu for some minutes; but at last the former prevailed, and with a nod she permitted Clara to read. She immediately began as follows:⁠—</p>
			<p>“<span class="smcap">My dear brother</span>.”</p>
			<p>“Humph,” observed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu, “his last letter began⁠—<em>Sir</em>. He’s getting wonderfully civil, I think.”</p>
			<p>“Pshaw!” exclaimed her husband.</p>
			<p>Clara continued⁠—“I am happy to inform you, that my dear Edmund has gained a glorious victory.”</p>
			<p>“And what is that to us, I should like to know?” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu: “for my part, I have too much pride to trouble myself about people, who don’t trouble themselves about me.”</p>
			<p>Clara went on.⁠—“We are all coming up to London, to be present at a grand triumph the Queen is going to give him; and thinking it a pity there should be a misunderstanding⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Ah! what’s that, child?” exclaimed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, laying down a problem which he had been studying ever since she began.⁠—“Read that again, Clara.”</p>
			<p>“And thinking it a pity there should be a misunderstanding any longer existing between you and me, we being both fast approaching to the grave, I intend, with your and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu’s permission⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu’s permission!” cried the delighted <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu; “are you quite sure he says that, Clara?” and she pressed over her daughter’s shoulder to ascertain the joyful fact. “Well, well, I do declare he really does says so. Look, my dear, there it is⁠—‘<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu’s permission.’ He never called me <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu before. God bless him! a nice old gentleman! I am sure I shall be very glad to see him and his brave son, too. Only think, my dear! what an honour it is to have a hero in one’s family! Read on, Clara; I feel quite interested to know all the particulars of my nephew’s victory. You know, he is my nephew, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, as well as yours, as I am your wife, and he is your own brother’s son; so, read on, Clara, and let us know all about him.”</p>
			<p>Clara obeyed the moment her mother gave her an opportunity. “I intend, with your and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu’s permission, to take the opportunity of visiting you. I remain, with kind remembrances to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu and my niece, to whom I long to be introduced, your affectionate brother,</p>
			<p>“<span class="smcap">Ambrose Montagu</span>.”</p>
			<p>“Very well,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, “I shall be very glad to see him; I always loved my brother, and I was quite sorry when we were not friends.”</p>
			<p>“Here is a postscript,” resumed Clara, and she read:</p>
			<p>“I quite forgot to inform you, that the Queen has conferred a title upon my son, and that I shall have to present him to you as Lord Edmund.”</p>
			<p>“I am very glad to hear it,” exclaimed the gratified uncle.</p>
			<p>“And so am I,” reiterated his wife. “My nephew, Lord Edmund Montagu. I wonder when they will be here: I must set about making preparations for them immediately. Strike the kitchen automaton, Clara, to summon all the domestic assistants together, that I may give my orders. Dear me! what a bustle I am in.”</p>
			<p>In one corner of the room stood a kind of organ, by playing certain notes upon which, intimation was given in the lower regions of what was wanted in the parlour; the organ having long tubes communicating with the kitchen, through which the sound was conveyed. Clara accordingly sat down, and by striking a few chords, soon assembled all the domestics of her father.</p>
			<p>“I expect company,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu, with an air of excessive consequence. “My brother-in-law, Sir Ambrose Montagu, and my nephew, Lord Edmund Montagu, are coming to stay with us during a triumph, with which her most gracious Majesty the Queen intends to honour Lord Edmund, my nephew. When did my brother-in-law, Sir Ambrose, say that he and my nephew, Lord Edmund, intended coming, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu? Clara, look at Sir Ambrose’s letter. ‘I intend,’ says he, addressing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, ‘with your and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu’s permission, to be with you on such a day,’ but I forget what day he mentions.”</p>
			<p>“He does not say which day,” replied Clara, consulting the letter.</p>
			<p>“Well, at any rate, it will be very soon,” resumed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu; “and we must prepare accordingly. You know, the connections of my brother-in-law, Sir Ambrose, are very high, and I do not doubt but his intimate friend, the Duke of Cornwall, will call to see him⁠—nay, perhaps, he may dine at my table with the two princesses, his daughter and niece. Indeed there’s no knowing, but, perhaps, even her most gracious Majesty the Queen may condescend to enter my humble doors. Do you hear, all of you?⁠—you must all be attentive. You Angelina, as cook, will have the most upon your hands⁠—remember, nothing can be too plain for great people. Fricassees and ragouts are only devoured by the <span xml:lang="fr">canaille</span>.”</p>
			<p>“I am instructed of that, Ma’am,” replied Angelina, a great, fat, bonny-looking cook⁠—“but I flatter myself I know how to concoct dishes⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That is the very thing I want to avoid,” interrupted her mistress. “It is the fashion now for great people to have only one dish, and that as plainly cooked as possible. I have been told by a friend of mine, who got a peep at the great dinner the Queen gave the other day to the foreign ambassadors, that there was nothing in the world upon the table, but a huge round of boiled beef, and a great dish of smoking potatoes, with their jackets on.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Ma’am,” returned Angelina, “I will rally both my physical and mental energies to afford you all the satisfaction in my power; notwithstanding which, I am free to confess, that, in my opinion, the gastronomic science is now cruelly neglected, and that I do not think the digestive powers of the stomach can be properly excited from their dormant state by such unstimulating food as that you mention. Besides, the muscular force of the stomach must be strained to decompose such solid viands, and I should think the diaphragm seriously injured⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You, Alphonso,” continued <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu, addressing the footman, and cruelly interrupting the learned harangue of the cook, “must have a new suit of livery. In the meantime, arrange properly the best drawing-room, and clean the pictures. There is a fine large painting of one of the old English artists, over the door, the colours of which are quite faded; I am afraid you have used something improper to clean it.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed, Madam,” returned Alphonso, “I think the fault is in the picture itself. It did not dry well originally; I don’t think the oil that was used in its composition had the carbon and hydrogen mingled in proper proportions. You know, Madam, that oil in general has an amazing affinity for oxygen, and absorbs it rapidly; now, though the oil of this picture has been exposed for years to the action of the common atmospheric air, yet it has never thickened properly into a concrete state.”</p>
			<p>“Eustace! you, as butler, must take care not to bring any variety of wines to the table: nothing is drunk now but port and sherry; and even they are going out of fashion. Have plenty of strong ale, however, and porter, for they are now reckoned the most elegant liquors for the ladies.”</p>
			<p>“I shall do my utmost endeavour to obey your injunctions, Madam,” said Eustace, bowing respectfully, “but I cannot imagine that any species of corn, even if it have undergone the vinous fermentation, can produce a liquid so agreeable to the palate, as well as conducive to the sanity of the body, as the juice of the grape.”</p>
			<p>“And you, Evelina and Cecilia,” continued <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu, addressing her housemaids, “must superintend the arrangement of the dormitories: let the air out of the beds and re-inflate them⁠—examine the elastic spring mattresses⁠—mend the gossamer curtains⁠—sweep the velvet carpets, and take care the tubes for withdrawing the decomposed air, and admitting fresh, are in proper order;⁠—also, clean out the baths attached to each chamber, and take care there is an abundant supply of water.”</p>
			<p>“I am told that ablution in the common aqueous fluid is becoming more fashionable than any medicated baths,” said Evelina, “and that some people of rank actually use a composition of alkali and oil to remove the pulverous particles that may have lodged upon their epidermis in the course of the day.”</p>
			<p>“I fear from the commands you have issued, Madam,” rejoined Cecilia, “that you were oblivious of the alteration that has been effected in the superior dormitory. The air there is no longer changed by means of tubes⁠—but there is a fan-feather ventilator fixed in the ceiling, which by its gentle undulations occasions a free circulation of the aëriform fluid; I do not think, however, that it is quite adequate to supply the place of the tubes; as upon entering the room the other morning, I perceived a strong sensation of azote, and I am confident that the proportion of nitrogen more than trebled that of oxygen in the air contained in the whole apartment.”</p>
			<p>“I am sorry for that,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu, “as it is the best sleeping-room: however, as it is too late to change it, we must do the best we can; and so go all of you and attend to my directions, for I should be very sorry to have my brother-in-law Sir Ambrose, and my nephew Lord Edmund, put to any inconvenience, during their sojourn in my dwelling; to say nothing of the great and noble guests who may perchance also honour the mansion with their presence.”</p>
			<p>Whilst this bustle was taking place in the house of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu, Edric and his tutor were on their way to London. It was with infinite difficulty, however, the doctor could be persuaded to set off without alarming the family; for, again and again, he would return to survey the treasures he was leaving behind, and the moment Edric thought he had him safe, he would recollect some indispensable requisite for their journey, and hurry back again to find it. At last they were fairly started, and a favourable wind blew them rapidly towards London. Edric had never seen this vast metropolis, and his astonishment and delight, when its magnificent palaces, its superb streets, its public buildings, its theatres, and its churches, broke upon him, was quite beyond description. His transports and exclamations, indeed, at length became so violent, as quite to annoy the learned doctor.</p>
			<p>“If you feel such rapture at the sight of London,” said he, peevishly, “I suppose you will be reluctant to quit it; and I dare say you already repent having proposed to travel.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! what is that?” cried Edric, without attending to him, as, lost in amazement, he saw a house in the suburbs gently slide out of its place, and glide majestically along the road, a lady at one of the windows kissing her hand to someone in another house as she passed. “Do my eyes deceive me, or does that house move?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly it does,” replied the doctor. “Did you never see a moving house before? You must have heard of them at any rate, for nothing can be more common. It certainly is convenient, when one wants to go into the country for a few weeks, to be able to take one’s house with one: it saves a great deal of trouble in packing, and permits one to have all one’s little conveniences about one. You see there are grooves in the bottom of the houses that just fit on the iron railways; and as they are propelled by steam, they slide on without much trouble. It does not answer, however, with any but small houses, for large ones can’t well be made compact enough. However, you must postpone your admiration of that, as well as of the other wonders of London, for here we are at Lord Gustavus’s door. What a noble mansion! is it not? This street, Edric, is called the Strand, and is the most fashionable in London; because it adjoins the Queen’s favourite palace at Somerset House.”</p>
			<p>“Is that the palace?” said Edric. “It seems a noble pile of building.”</p>
			<p>“The gardens are fine,” replied the doctor; “but as they are thrown open to the public, and nothing is paid for admission, it is reckoned vulgar to walk in them. You English do not like anything you do not pay for; but more of this hereafter. We must now prepare to pay our respects to our noble host.”</p>
			<p>Lord Gustavus de Montfort received them very kindly, but Edric found something in his voice and manners excessively forbidding. He had a pompous disagreeable manner of speaking, with a nasal accent so strong, that it was absolutely torture to Edric, whose sense of hearing was uncommonly fine, to listen to him. He had also a conceited dictatorial way of delivering his opinion, which Edric thought extremely unpleasant. He generally commenced his speeches with “Thinking as I think, and as I am positive everyone who hears me must think, or at least ought to think;” and this exordium formed an epitome of his character; as he was firmly persuaded that everyone who differed in the slightest degree from his opinion, was decidedly wrong, whilst the possibility of his ever being mistaken himself never entered his imagination. His father had been one of the counsellors of the late Queen, and his eldest brother having declined to take the father’s place upon his death, Lord Gustavus had been appointed to it. Thus he was really a person of some consequence in the state; and though his being so was quite a matter of chance, arising from the circumstances above-mentioned and the indolence of the Queen, he affected to regard it as a matter of personal favour to himself, and endeavoured to persuade his hearers that the affairs of government could not possibly go on without him. Knowing his foible of wishing to be thought of importance in the realm, and feeling the want of a leader of rank, some of the discontented spirits of the kingdom had endeavoured to gain him over to their party; and though Lord Gustavus was strictly loyal, and even particularly fond of talking of her gracious Majesty the Queen, and boasting of the confidence she placed in him, yet his vanity could not altogether resist the able attacks made upon it by the rebels. He wavered, he began to talk of reform, and to mingle boasts of his popularity amongst the people, with those he had before indulged in, of enjoying the favour of his sovereign. Thus he hung upon the balance, ready to incline to either side, according to the circumstances that time or chance might produce.</p>
			<p>“I am extremely happy,” said he, as he advanced to meet his guests, “that my worthy and respected friend Father Morris has procured me the honour of such illustrious visitors. The holy father has informed me of the sublime purpose that animates your bosoms and leads you to traverse realms of air, to explore the hitherto undiscovered secrets of the grave. His partiality for me has also led him to imagine that my humble means may perchance prove conducive to so great an end, and he has requested me to give you all the assistance in my power to promote the gigantic objects you have in view. Thus you may rest assured, no efforts shall be wanting on my part to fulfil his wishes, and as, though insignificant in myself, I am so happy as to be honoured by the protection and favour of her Majesty the Queen, my most gracious sovereign; and also as my feeble attempts to promote the public good have been rewarded by the gratitude of the people; it may perchance be in my power to serve you; and in the meantime I hope you will do me the honour to partake of such hospitality as my humble mansion can afford.” So saying, Lord Gustavus led the way through a sumptuous suite of rooms, to one where an elegant cold collation was laid out, of which he invited his guests to partake. Nothing could be more splendid than the furniture and embellishments of this apartment. The rooms were hung with crimson silk, trimmed with gold; valuable paintings decorated the walls; statues of inestimable price filled each corner, and magnificent mirrors increased tenfold the magic of the scene. Lord Gustavus secretly enjoyed the astonishment and admiration painted upon the countenances of his guests; and whilst he openly affected to talk of his “poor house,” and his “humble attempts to entertain them,” etc. his heart covertly exalted in the grandeur around him, and his eyes sparkled with pleasure at the effect he saw it produced upon the strangers. Nothing makes one so much disposed to be in a good humour with the world, as being in a good humour with oneself; and nothing is so certain to produce that delightful sensation, as to see what we possess excite the admiration of others. Thus, as the flattery conveyed by looks far outweighs that expressed by words, and as the looks of Edric and the doctor unequivocally declared their sentiments, Lord Gustavus was quite enchanted with his visitors, and spared no pains to render them equally happy as himself. He ordered a large apartment to be prepared for the doctor, that he might make his arrangements for the intended Egyptian expedition quite at his ease; he commanded his servants to obey his directions implicitly, and he directed tradesmen to supply everything that might be wanted at his own expense.</p>
			<p>Having thus given the doctor carte blanche, he next turned his attention to Edric, and, finding it was his first visit to London, volunteered to show him all the wonders of that immense metropolis, which then, spreading enormously in every direction, seemed like the fabled monster of the Indians, to stretch its enormous arms on every side and swallow up all the hapless villages which were so unfortunate as to fall within its reach.</p>
			<p>In the meantime, Sir Ambrose had begun to repent, though secretly, of the unwarrantable severity with which he had treated his son. It is a trite though undeniable observation, that we never know the real value of any possession till we have lost it; and thus Sir Ambrose, though he had thought nothing of the respectful and dutiful attentions of his son, whilst he was in the habit of constantly receiving them, now felt their want, and regretted bitterly the ill-timed harshness that had deprived him of them forever. Still, however, he was too obstinate to own he had been wrong; and though he knew that by recalling his son he should restore his lost happiness, he, like many other persons in similar situations, most magnanimously determined to persist in being miserable.</p>
			<p>The Duke of Cornwall was quite astonished, and even indignant, at what he termed the inconsistency of his friend. “How can you be so weak as still to regret the loss of that peevish boy?” said he, as, on the second morning after Edric’s departure, he entered the library of Sir Ambrose, attended by his confessor, Father Murphy. “Depend upon it, it is bad policy; for patience robs care of its bitterest sting, as this holy father says. You often preach that doctrine to me, don’t you, Father Murphy?” Father Murphy was an Irishman, and gifted with a rich brogue, which, aided by his comely figure, round rosy face, and little laughing black eyes, gave a peculiar raciness to everything he said. He had not long filled the office he then held, and though he had been recommended to it, on the death of the duke’s late confessor, by Father Morris, yet no two human beings could be more different than he and that reverend personage. Father Murphy, indeed, was a general favourite, and the whole household of the duke concurred in thinking him quite a nonpareil of a priest; for, as he was not very fond of doing penance himself, so he was not very rigid in imposing it upon others, and consequently he and his penitents were always upon the best terms imaginable. In short, he seemed especially designed by Nature to be good friends with all the world; and on his side he certainly did the utmost not to thwart the beneficent old lady’s kind intentions.</p>
			<p>He now smiled good-humouredly at the duke’s question, and replied, “Och! and is it me ye’re quoting from, yere Grace? And where’s the use of that, pray? when ye know I’m just here and ready to quote for myself.”</p>
			<p>“If all your observations are as good as that the duke has just repeated,” said Sir Ambrose, “I don’t know anybody that might be quoted from with more advantage.”</p>
			<p>“Sure! and is it of myself ye’re saying that?” asked Father Murphy, “for if ye are, ye never made a better spach in all your life; only there’s a little mistake if ye think the observation ye’re talking of came out of my own head, for it didn’t do any such thing.”</p>
			<p>“Do not be alarmed,” said Father Morris, who now approached, and who spoke with his usual satirical sneer: “No one who knows you will ever suspect you of anything so atrocious.”</p>
			<p>“Good-nature and integrity are sometimes more than equivalent to brilliant talents,” said Sir Ambrose bitterly.</p>
			<p>“True,” rejoined Father Morris, in one of his softest, most insinuating tones; “but they become inestimable when united, as in the example before us:” bowing to Father Murphy as he spoke. Sir Ambrose turned, and looked earnestly at the tall thin figure of the monk as he stood before him, his arms crossed upon his breast, and his head, as usual, bent towards the ground, but he did not speak. A short pause ensued, which was broken by the duke’s suddenly exclaiming, “Did you not say <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Entwerfen has gone off with Edric?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly, I did.”</p>
			<p>“Then, depend upon it, the whole was a planned thing. They have taken some wild scheme into their heads, and they are gone to execute it.”</p>
			<p>“Impossible!” exclaimed Sir Ambrose.</p>
			<p>“I see no impossibility in the business,” resumed the duke. “I think the case is clear. They did not know how to get off decently; and so Edric pretended to quarrel with you and me, to give the thing a face.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot fancy Edric guilty of such meanness,” cried Sir Ambrose passionately.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think the matter admits of a single doubt. But what do you think on the subject, Father Morris?”</p>
			<p>“Men devoted to austere professions like myself,” replied the priest, without raising his eyes from the ground, “know but little of what is passing in the world. Thus, though my body be no longer shrouded in the gloom of a cloister, my mind remains still too much abstracted from the busy scenes around me, for me to be a competent judge of the effect of human passions.”</p>
			<p>“Och, then, ye are very right to say nothin’ about them,” cried Father Murphy; “for though I’m in a passion every day of my life, I nevher know what to say when I begin to talk of it. And so I jist think it’s the wisest way to holdth my tongue.”</p>
			<p>Neither Sir Ambrose nor the duke made any reply; and after settling that they should commence their journey on the following morning, they separated.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
