<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<a id="CHAPTER_<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span>">CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span>.</a>
			</h2>
			<p>The evening of the day on which Prince Ferdinand and Lord Edmund were committed to prison, Sir Ambrose, as he was writing in his study, was startled by a loud scream; and flying to the spot from whence it proceeded, he found Clara lying upon the ground insensible, whilst Abelard was stooping over her, and endeavouring to render her some assistance.</p>
			<p>“Good God!” cried Sir Ambrose, “what is the matter?”</p>
			<p>“It is all owing to the carelessness of the domestic assistants at the next door,” replied Abelard. “<abbr>No.</abbr> 7, is just come back from Brighton; and one of the assistants being occupied in making observations on the sky, instead of minding what he was doing, pushed the house a little on one side as it was slipping into the sockets; and poking their horizontal spout through our library window, they have knocked down this shelf of books, and frightened poor Miss Clara out of her wits.”</p>
			<p>“Stupid idiots,” said the baronet; “they might have killed her if the books had fallen upon her.”</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon, Sir Ambrose,” said the culprit, putting his head through the window; “I do not conceive Miss Montagu would have been injured even if the books had fallen upon her. The weight of her body, I should apprehend, must be nearly equivalent to that of the books; consequently, the resistance she was capable of opposing, being fully equal to the blow she would have received, the effect must have been neutralized.”</p>
			<p>“Confound your explanations!” said Sir Ambrose, whose anger was increased tenfold by this speech; “you’ve killed my niece, and now you want to drive me distracted. Clara, my dear Clara! open your eyes, my love; are you hurt?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my dear uncle!” sighed Clara, “Edmund is in prison, and he certainly will be beheaded.”</p>
			<p>“In prison, child! you must be dreaming.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed I am not, uncle: I heard the men who are placing the adjoining house say so. He has fought with Prince Ferdinand in the palace garden.”</p>
			<p>“My boy, my darling boy!” cried Sir Ambrose, and rushed out of the room in despair.</p>
			<p>“Follow him, for Heaven’s sake, follow him, Abelard,” said Clara. The worthy butler obeyed, wringing his hands, and lifting his eyes up to heaven; whilst Clara remained perfectly motionless, and apparently absorbed in thought.</p>
			<p>“I will save him,” said she after a short pause, “or perish in the attempt.”</p>
			<p>In the bitterest anguish of mind, Sir Ambrose hastened to the palace; but he was refused admittance, as he was informed the Queen was in a high fever. He inquired for his friend the duke: he too was invisible, his late attack having placed his life in imminent danger. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Coleman was in attendance on the Queen; and the lords of the council, though they affected to sympathize with the unfortunate father, evidently, though covertly, rejoiced at the disgrace of their most powerful rival. Repulsed on every side, Sir Ambrose now proceeded to the prison; but here also he was refused admittance, and sadly and slowly he returned home in despair, resting his sole remaining hopes upon the advice and assistance of Father Morris, upon whose gigantic strength of mind he was accustomed implicitly to rely in all the impotency of age and misery.</p>
			<p>The prison to which Ferdinand and Lord Edmund had been conveyed was situated in a close disagreeable part of the city of London, called Kensington. It had been formerly a palace, and had been surrounded by a noble park miscalled a garden. The devastating hand of improvement had however, as usual, waged war against all the sublimer charms of nature, and the majestic beauties of Kensington fell victims to its fury. Narrow, unwholesome streets now rose where spreading oaks had once stretched forth their venerable arms, and verdant lawns had become dirty causeways; whilst ponds were turned to water pipes, and Jacob’s well kept clean a common sewer. As Ferdinand and Edmund, however, had never seen Kensington in its pristine glories, they could not now regret the change: and it was to them neither more nor less than a place of confinement, a spot very few people show any manifest relish for.</p>
			<p>Immediately upon their arrival, Prince Ferdinand and Lord Edmund had their wounds dressed by the automaton steam surgeon belonging to the prison, which, being properly arranged and wound up, staunched the blood, spread the plasters, and affixed the bandages with as much skill as though it had done nothing but walk a hospital all its life. As soon as these operations were performed, the prisoners were locked up in separate cells, and left to meditate upon their situations.</p>
			<p>“Good Heavens!” cried Ferdinand, looking round with astonishment at the elegant apartment he was shown into, adorned with a painted velvet carpet, silk curtains, and chairs and tables inlaid with brass and ivory; whilst a sumptuous canopy hung over a bed of down on one side, and divers little Cupids supported lights, held back curtains, and performed numerous other useful offices in different corners. “Can this be a prison? Neither Paris nor Vienna possess palaces half so splendid!”</p>
			<p>The surprise of Ferdinand was natural, as he was still almost a stranger in England, and did not know that our happy island had been long blest with a race of people who thought prisons should be made agreeable residences, and had gone on improving them till they had ended in making them temples of luxury. In spite of all the conveniences of his prison, however, Ferdinand was perfectly wretched. He could not imagine what reason Lord Edmund had had for fastening a quarrel upon him; for, as his passion for Elvira, though violent, had been quite as evanescent as that he had formerly entertained for Rosabella, he had not the least idea of having excited Lord Edmund’s jealousy. Fatigued at length with forming fruitless conjectures, he threw himself upon his bed of down, and soon lost the remembrance of his cares in a refreshing slumber.</p>
			<p>In the meantime, Clara was revolving in her mind the best method of putting in practice a wild scheme that she had formed, of visiting Prince Ferdinand in prison. She did not dare confide her plan to anyone, for she feared that anybody she might consult would either laugh at her folly or betray her secret. Besides, to obtain any assistance, she must give some motive for her conduct; and as Clara did not exactly know her own reasons for thus acting, it was quite impossible she could make out a case to satisfy another. To go, however, she was determined; and when the family of her uncle were all retired, she wrapped herself in a large mantle, and with some difficulty contrived to reach the street. The night was cold and dark; a thick mist fell, and Clara seemed chilled to the heart; yet a feeling she could not account for, urged her on. Clara was young and romantic; she loved Prince Ferdinand, and she fancied him in danger. How she was to save him she knew not, and yet it was solely the hope of saving him that urged her forward.</p>
			<p>She had discovered he was confined at Kensington, and thither she bent her steps:⁠—but as she passed the palace, she found a crowd of balloons floating around it, laden with persons whose anxiety respecting the Queen had kept them waiting, and induced them to besiege her door personally with their inquiries; whilst the lighted flambeaux, belonging to these aërial vehicles, flashed brightly in the air, and looked like a multitude of dancing stars, as they rapidly crossed and recrossed each other above her head.</p>
			<p>This little incident completed poor Clara’s bewilderment; and, terrified lest she should be seen and recognized, she hurried on without exactly knowing where she was going, till, perplexed by the different appearance the streets seemed to assume in the darkness, and her own fears, she found to her unspeakable dismay that she had lost her road. In the greatest agitation and distress, she now wandered to and fro, whilst her embarrassment was increased every moment by the ill-timed raillery of the passers by. At last, she became quite surrounded by a group of people, who assailed her with so many questions and jokes, that the poor girl, quite overpowered, stopped short, and burst into tears.</p>
			<p>“Och! and what are ye about to be after disturbing a poor young cratur like that,” cried the well-known voice of Father Murphy, as the friar’s portly figure was seen bustling through the mob. “What are ye after there? Don’t you see the poor thing has lost her way in the darkness; and if ye bother her so, how d’ye think she’ll ever be able to find it?”</p>
			<p>Never did any music sound so harmoniously in Clara’s ears, as the father’s rich deep brogue; and darting forwards she threw herself at his feet, and, clasping her arms round his knees, she exclaimed⁠—“Oh! save me! I am Clara! Clara Montagu!”</p>
			<p>“Clara!” cried Father Murphy, in the utmost astonishment. “Clara! why, what in the name of Heaven brings you out, child, at this hour of the night?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! don’t ask me, father,” returned Clara, gasping for breath; “that is, I will tell you presently. But take me away; for the love of the blessed Virgin, save me from these men!”</p>
			<p>“Come here, my child,” said the Father, drawing her arm within his own, and walking away with her; “let us lave these people. And now,” continued he, when they were already at some distance from the crowd, “you must tell me, child, what brings ye here?”</p>
			<p>This question, though it was a very natural one for the friar to ask, was beyond Clara’s power to answer. In fact, she trembled so dreadfully that she could scarcely stand; and when she attempted to speak, her teeth chattered in her head so violently, that she could not articulate a syllable. “Poor thing,” muttered the compassionate priest, after waiting a few minutes in vain for an answer, “she’ll be better presently.”</p>
			<p>All now was dark, and they walked slowly on some paces without speaking, when four bright flashes from a neighbouring clock announced the completion of some hour, and the next instant the solemn deep-toned bell distinctly pronounced the word “one,” and then all again was silent.</p>
			<p>“I had no fancy it was so late,” said the father, whose disposition was naturally too cheerful to let him ever remain long silent.</p>
			<p>“Did you think it was one o’clock, Clara? I little thought I should ever be wandering with you, dear, in the streets at such a time of night. I can’t help fancying it’s all a dream, anyhow: so speak, darling, if you can, and tell me all about it.”</p>
			<p>Clara felt still more faint, and only replied by clinging yet more firmly to the friar’s arm. Father Murphy was frightened and thought she was going to die.⁠—“Oh murther!” cried he, “what will I do? she brathing her last, sweet cratur, and nobody by to help her, and I not knowing how to comfort her.”</p>
			<p>The delicate form of Clara seemed every instant to become more heavy, as she still clung almost unconsciously to the friar’s arm, and gasped feebly for breath.</p>
			<p>“Oh! what will I do? what will I do?” repeated the poor father, looking eagerly around for aid: all however was dark, and gloomy and silent as the grave. Suddenly, however, a bright meteor-like substance appeared at the edge of the horizon, and the friar, to his unspeakable transport, discovered it to be a patent night fire-stage balloon. He hailed it, and in a few moments it was hovering over their heads; the accommodation ladder was let down, and Clara and her companion having ascended to the car, the balloon again rapidly sailed along.</p>
			<p>“Where are we going?” asked Clara faintly.</p>
			<p>“Och!” returned the friar, “and that’s what I never thought of asking, darling; but Heaven be praised that ye are so much better as to be able to bother yourself about it.”</p>
			<p>“We are going to Kensington, miss,” said the balloon conductor.</p>
			<p>“Kensington!” repeated Clara, clapping her hands together in transport⁠—“thank God!”</p>
			<p>“It’s a very good thing to be thankful anyhow,” said the father; “but I own I don’t see why you should cry out in such rapture, when you find we are going the wrong road.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! no, no, father,” returned Clara, “not the wrong road; for Kensington is the goal of all my wishes.”</p>
			<p>“Poor thing! she is certainly distracted,” thought Father Murphy. “The loss of her cousin has deprived her of her senses; but I will let her take her own way; perhaps she’ll be better presently.”</p>
			<p>“Where will you like to be set down?” asked the man.</p>
			<p>“Near the prison,” cried Clara eagerly.</p>
			<p>“Near the prison!” repeated Father Murphy, shrugging his shoulders. “Ay, ay, I was right.”</p>
			<p>Not another word was spoken till the balloon stopped and the passengers were set down: all still was dark, save a land-light that gleamed from the battlements of the prison, and showed a tall, clumsy-looking figure that marched with heavy, measured steps to and fro before the gates, whilst at a little distance lay a party of soldiers bivouacking. Clara shuddered as she looked at them, and hastily turning away, timidly approached the figure, and begged it to let her into the prison. It continued its march, but as it did not speak, she attempted to pass by it.</p>
			<p>“No admittance,” said the figure, as she touched it, in trying to reach the door.</p>
			<p>“I implore you,” cried Clara, wringing her hands in agony.</p>
			<p>The figure did not reply, but continued its solemn tramp unmoved; its hollow steps falling heavily upon the ear at regular intervals. Driven to despair, Clara again endeavoured to rush past it; but she was again repulsed as the figure reiterated its monotonous “No admittance!” Clara threw herself upon her knees before it in agony.</p>
			<p>“Clara! Clara dear!” cried Father Murphy, attempting to raise her, “you are certainly quite beside yourself; don’t you see it is an automaton? nothing can stop it but the proper check-string, and that is in that little guard house, round which you see the soldiers lying.”</p>
			<p>“Then <em>they</em> can admit me,” cried Clara wildly, “they <em>are men</em>, and will surely listen to me:” then before the father could stop her, she flew towards them, and throwing herself at the feet of the commanding officer, implored his pity. The officer was a man of feeling, and, touched with compassion at her evident anguish, had promised to grant her petition ere Father Murphy, who was too fat to move with much agility, could reach them. “Thank you! thank you!” cried Clara, kissing the officer’s hand. “God bless you!”</p>
			<p>The officer smiled at her warmth. “Wait here a little,” said he: “I will soon return and admit you, if I obtain permission; but State Prisoners are ordered to be guarded so closely, that I dare not take any step respecting them, without consulting the governor.”</p>
			<p>“So then you’ll get in after all,” said Father Murphy, who had approached near enough to hear this last speech. “Well, well, what a world this is we live in! Here have been dukes and princes begging for admission unsuccessfully, and yet a little saucy girl, only because she happens to be half distracted, is let in at the very first word.”</p>
			<p>Clara did not reply; but wrapping herself in her cloak, sat down on a large stone near the gates to wait the officer’s return. The solemn automaton had been stopped for a moment to allow him to pass, but it had now resumed its slow measured step, and Clara’s heart sickened at the sound. The mist cleared away, and the night became fine, though cold, whilst the moon having struggled through the clouds that rapidly scudded across the sky, shed her pale feeble light upon the scene. Clara shuddered as she looked at the dark heavy building behind her, and, wrapping her cloak tighter round her, fixed her eyes anxiously upon the sky, watching the varied shapes assumed by the clouds as they drifted along, and sighing heavily as they passed.</p>
			<p>“Now tell me, dear,” said Father Murphy, seating himself beside her, “what ye mane to say to yere cousin when ye get in to see him. Spake freely, for the devil a word the spalpeens yonder shall hear of what ye’re going to say, by rason of their being all fast asleep.”</p>
			<p>“My cousin!” exclaimed Clara. “Who? what?”</p>
			<p>“Your cousin Edmund, that ye’re come so far to see,” resumed the father.</p>
			<p>“My cousin!” replied Clara; “Oh! ay, true. It was my cousin that fought with him, you know. But I don’t want to see my cousin.”</p>
			<p>“Not want to see your cousin!” reiterated Father Murphy, his eyes almost starting from his head in the excess of his astonishment. “Why did you come here then?”</p>
			<p>“To⁠—to see Prince Ferdinand,” said Clara in a faltering voice, looking down, and blushing.</p>
			<p>Father Murphy’s astonishment was now far too great for words, and he could only look at her in speechless horror as he revolved some plan in his mind for getting her quietly back to her friends.</p>
			<p>“How wild she looks!” thought he: “she must be put in confinement; there is no saying to what lengths, so strange a delusion may carry her.”</p>
			<p>Whilst the poor father was thus cogitating and repeating to himself divers coaxing forms of words, by the help of which he hoped to persuade her to return, the automaton again stopped, and, the prison door flying open, the officer beckoned Clara to advance. She flew towards him. “Clara! Clara dear!” said Father Murphy, “had you not better go home?” But Clara heard him not; she was already in the prison; the doors had closed, and the automaton sentinel had again resumed his measured, beaten track.</p>
			<p>“Oh dear! oh dear!” cried the unhappy Father Murphy, “what will I do? How will I get her out? Poor Sir Ambrose⁠—he will break his heart. I dare say he knows nothing about it. These kind of fits always come on suddenly.”</p>
			<p>Thus lamenting, the worthy father walked up and down before the prison in a state of pitiable distress, till a bright thought flashed across his mind, and he set off as fast as his trembling limbs could carry him to put it in execution.</p>
			<p>In the meantime Clara had followed the officer into the prison, and her heart beat faster as she advanced, for her undertaking now appeared to her in a new light, and she trembled as she thought of the interpretation the Prince might put upon her boldness. It was, however, too late to repent; she had not even time for hesitation. The officer is already at the door, the bolts are withdrawn, and Clara finds herself in the presence of Ferdinand. Confused and horror-struck at what she had done, she, however, scarcely knew where she was, everything seemed to swim before her eyes, and, gasping for breath, she caught firm hold of the doorway for support.</p>
			<p>For some moments, Ferdinand was not aware of her presence, as he sat gloomily resting his head upon his hand, his elbow supported by a table, upon which lay a variety of papers, whilst Hans, a favourite servant, who had followed him from Germany, stood beside him.</p>
			<p>Awed by his abstraction, and abashed by the presumption she had been guilty of, in intruding, unsolicited, upon his presence, Clara still stood irresolute, fearing alike to advance or to recede, till the officer, impatient at her delay, cried, in a loud voice⁠—</p>
			<p>“Walk in, if you please, Ma’am, that I may re-lock the door. I shall return to let you out in an hour.”</p>
			<p>The sound of the officer’s voice caught the attention of Ferdinand, and he looked towards the doorway, from the shade of which the trembling Clara was now forced to advance.</p>
			<p>“Miss Montagu,” cried Prince Ferdinand, who had seen her at one of Elvira’s parties, and had thought her so pretty as to inquire her name⁠—“this is an unhoped-for pleasure; I did not expect this.”</p>
			<p>“I came⁠—I came⁠—” stammered Clara: and here she stopped short, for upon recollection she really could not tell why she did come.</p>
			<p>“I am delighted to see you,” said the prince, smiling, and taking her hand, “whatever may be the cause that has procured me this honour.”</p>
			<p>“I⁠—I⁠—I⁠—had⁠—rather⁠—sit⁠—down,” stammered Clara, without having the least idea what she was talking about.</p>
			<p>“Well then, we will sit down,” said Ferdinand: and, gently placing her upon a chair, he drew one to her side, and again took her hand. His touch thrilled through Clara’s whole frame. She felt his ardent gaze upon her face, and dreadfully agitated, fearing she knew not what, she turned away from him, and tried to withdraw her hand.</p>
			<p>“I⁠—I⁠—I⁠—believe⁠—I must go,” said she.</p>
			<p>“So soon,” cried Ferdinand, again smiling, for it was impossible to mistake the cause of her confusion. “I thought the gaoler said he should not come again for you in less than an hour.”</p>
			<p>“Did he!” repeated Clara, quite unconscious of what she said, and without daring to look at him.</p>
			<p>“My dear Miss Montagu, will you not bestow one look upon me?” cried Ferdinand, in his most insinuating tone, sinking upon one knee before her, and gently encircling her slender waist with his arm, as he turned her towards him. Clara could not resist his imploring eyes; her heart beat, she blushed, she trembled, she looked upon the ground; when suddenly Ferdinand uttered a faint cry, and started upon his feet. Clara gazed at him with wonder, for that countenance, so lately beaming with love and tenderness, now seemed aghast with horror. She followed the direction of his eyes, and beheld in the doorway the giant form of Cheops; whilst the Mummy’s appalling laugh resounded in his ears. Involuntarily Clara shuddered, and hid her face in her hands.</p>
			<p>“By the silver bow of Isis!” cried Cheops tauntingly, “I admire your charity, Miss Montagu. Why do you hide your face? But so it is, true merit is always bashful, and the beneficent spirit that prompted Clara Montagu to visit the distressed, and even prefer a stranger to her own cousin, makes her blush to avow her goodness.”</p>
			<p>“Mercy! mercy!” cried Clara, falling at his feet. “You know my heart, and I implore your assistance.”</p>
			<p>“And you shall have it,” returned Cheops. “As for you,” continued he, addressing the prince; “what is your wish?”</p>
			<p>“Deliver me from this prison, and make Clara mine, and I will be your slave.”</p>
			<p>“It is well,” said the Mummy. “Clara, you must retire with me; this is no place for you. As for you, prince, Lord Maysworth and Father Murphy will be admitted to your presence in the course of a few hours, to consult with you respecting your defence. Follow their advice, and fear nothing. Rely upon me, and you shall be safe. Come, Clara! you must return to the house of your uncle. He is prepared to receive you, and will forgive your absence, as Father Murphy will, ere we reach him, have fully explained its cause: and Sir Ambrose will overlook your folly, in consideration of your youth. Adieu, Prince! we shall meet again!”</p>
			<p>The Mummy and Clara now withdrew, leaving the prince’s mind much relieved, as his confidence in his new friend was unbounded; whilst the discovery he had made of the devoted love of Clara soothed his troubled spirit, and robbed his confinement of half its bitterness.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
