<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<a id="CHAPTER_<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>">CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>.</a>
			</h2>
			<p>When Sir Ambrose and the duke thus withdrew, Edric and Rosabella were left alone together, and remained for some moments in perfect silence, for both felt keenly the awkwardness of their situation. After standing for some time looking as foolish as their enemies could reasonably desire, Edric bowed, and would have made good his retreat, but Rosabella stopped him.</p>
			<p>“Let us be friends, Edric,” said she, smiling and holding out her hand, “though we are no longer lovers.”</p>
			<p>Edric took the offered hand, and involuntarily pressed it to his lips. “Upon my word, you improve!” continued Rosabella gaily; “I declare I never saw such an instance of gallantry from you before, during the whole course of our courtship!”</p>
			<p>Edric smiled as he replied, “If you knew the burthen that has been taken from my mind by the explanation of this morning⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hush! hush!” cried Rosabella laughing, “Now you have spoiled all again. I was afraid your gallantry was too great to be lasting.”</p>
			<p>“I acknowledge,” replied Edric, joining in her mirth, “that it is not very polite in me to rejoice in being freed from your chains: but I am no flatterer, and⁠—and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“A truce with apologies,” exclaimed Rosabella; “as my uncle very justly observed just now, they only make the matter worse. The case is simply this: you and I were not suited for each other; we found it out, and we are both glad to be released from ties that we discovered were incompatible with our happiness. ‘Can any thing be more clear?’ as <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Entwerfen says. You, I presume, are going to travel, and to gratify your natural love of variety and wish to acquire information; whilst I, poor unfortunate damsel that I am, must remain at home and wear the willow, till I am fortunate enough to meet with a swain who has the penetration to discover my charms.”</p>
			<p>“And most ardently do I hope that it may soon be the case!” said Edric, astonished at her affability, and feeling more kindly disposed towards her than he had ever done before. “You are right in supposing I wish to travel; but, alas! I have not now the power. My father is too much offended to afford me the means; and without money⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Travelling is far from agreeable,” interrupted Rosabella, smiling: “is not that what you would say? Why not apply to Father Morris, then; he can, and I am sure, will help you. For myself, I am powerless, except as far as giving advice.”</p>
			<p>“Your advice, however, is excellent,” replied Edric, regarding her with still increasing amazement; “and I assure you I will follow it to the letter. I never thought of applying to the reverend father, though I now feel it is the best thing I can do.”</p>
			<p>“Why then do you look at me so incredulously?” continued Rosabella; “I can have no motive for deceiving you; and yet you look as suspicious as though you thought I had. I own my behaviour towards you is changed; but remember the different circumstances in which I am now placed. Formerly I feared even to speak to you, lest my words should be deemed an encouragement of the pretensions I supposed you to entertain to my hand. Now that we are both free, that reason no longer exists; and besides, I feel grateful to you for declaring your sentiments so openly, and thus saving me from my uncle’s displeasure. ‘Can any thing be more simple?’ as your friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Entwerfen would say.”</p>
			<p>Notwithstanding Rosabella’s apparent openness, however, and the plausible reasons she gave for her conduct, Edric could not divest himself of the idea that she wished to get him out of the kingdom as speedily as possible, for some other motives than those she thought proper to avow. There likewise appeared some mystery in her speaking so confidently of the assistance of Father Morris; for as the duke’s family had a regular confessor, Father Murphy, it seemed strange that Rosabella should have an intercourse with any other priest, beyond that required by the common forms of society; and so slight an intimacy could scarcely warrant the positive assertion she had made use of. Edric, however, was too anxious to avail himself of any opportunity that offered of proceeding to Egypt, to trouble himself with long investigation of the subject; and when he quitted Rosabella, he proceeded in search of Father Morris as a matter of course, and almost without any volition of his own.</p>
			<p>The suite of rooms appropriated to Father Morris in the mansion of Sir Ambrose was in a wing partly detached from the main dwelling; and thither Edric bent his steps. As he approached, however, to his great surprise he heard a sound of blows followed by deep groans. Knowing that it was the hour of dinner for the domestics, and that none of the other inmates of the mansion were at home but the friar and himself, he could not at first account for this strange and fearful noise; but finding, as he advanced, the sounds proceeded from the inner chamber of the priest, where no one but himself ever ventured, he soon became satisfied that Father Morris was performing a penance of self-flagellation; and as it was deemed impious to interrupt a penitence, he seated himself quietly in the outer chamber, waiting the priest’s leisure; wondering, however, to himself, what crime so holy a man could possibly have committed, that could require so severe an expiation.</p>
			<p>When Father Morris made his appearance, it was with his usual downcast eyes and composed look. He expressed his astonishment at seeing Edric, but made no allusion to the penance he had just been performing, and listened with a cold unmoved aspect to Edric’s communication.</p>
			<p>“Then I am to understand,” said he, when it was finished, “that you are like the prince we were reading of the other day, in a book we found in your tutor’s library. You cannot be happy because you have never been miserable; and you are going to plunge into all the cares and troubles of the world, merely to learn how to enjoy retirement.”</p>
			<p>“Not exactly so, father;” rejoined Edric; “I have two other motives⁠—the anger of my father, and the earnest tormenting wish I before confessed to you, of diving into the secrets of the grave.”</p>
			<p>“And how is that to be accomplished by your leaving England?”</p>
			<p>“I wish to try to resuscitate a mummy.”</p>
			<p>“The scheme is wild, vague, and impracticable.”</p>
			<p>“Not if <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Entwerfen’s hypothesis be true. For, supposing the souls of the ancient Egyptians to be chained to their bodies, and to be remaining in them in a torpid state⁠—it is very possible that by employing so powerful an agent as galvanism, re-animation may be produced. I have already seen some wonderful instances of the vivifying power of the machine; and as the Egyptians took care to preserve the bodies of their dead quite entire, probably from the idea I have just alluded to⁠—I think the mummies are the best subjects we can possibly fix upon for our experiments.”</p>
			<p>“The ancient Egyptians did not imagine the souls of their dead remained in the bodies, but that they would return to them after the expiration of a certain number of years; so that your hypothesis, as far as it rests upon their opinions, falls to the ground.”</p>
			<p>“Do not call it my hypothesis,” returned Edric, “it is that of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Entwerfen; my own opinion is decidedly different⁠—for I cannot imagine any idea of death that does not imply a separation between the body and soul. The subject, however, is curious; to me highly interesting; and I own, candidly, there are many mysteries connected with it, which it would give me the highest satisfaction to have explained.”</p>
			<p>“And these mysteries, which have vainly excited the speculation of the learned since the commencement of the world, you think your journey to Egypt will enable you to unravel,” said Father Morris, with a sardonic sneer. Edric felt irritated at his manner, and replied warmly:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I am not presumptuous, father; but as even you must allow, man is often but a blind instrument in the hands of fate, it is possible that the racking desire I feel to explore these mysteries may be an impulse from a superior power, and a proof that I am destined to be the mortal agent of their revelation to man. Egypt is a country rich in monuments of antiquity; and all historians unite in declaring her ancient inhabitants to have possessed knowledge and science far beyond even the boasted improvements of modern times. For instance, could we attempt to erect stupendous buildings like the pyramids, where enormous masses are arranged with geometrical accuracy, and the labours of man have emulated the everlasting durability of nature? Are we even capable of conceiving works so majestic as those they put in execution? No; assuredly not. In every point they surpassed us.”</p>
			<p>“Even in their religion?” asked Father Morris sarcastically.</p>
			<p>“No,” returned Edric; “every scheme of religion falls infinitely below the divine perfection of Christianity; but as Christianity was not in the times we are speaking of, revealed, it cannot be denied that the Egyptians made some approach to wisdom even in their devotions. They worshipped Nature, though they disguised her under the symbols of her attributes, and gratified the vulgar taste by giving them tangible objects to represent ideas too sublime for their unenlightened comprehension. That they entertained the divine idea of a resurrection, and of rewards and punishments in a future life, is evident, not only from their favourite fable of the Phœnix, and the use they made of the now hackneyed image of the Butterfly; but by the care they bestowed upon the preservation of the body; their mournings for the loss of Osiris, and rejoicings when he was found; and the kind of trial to which they subjected the human corpse after death, when, if serious crimes were alleged, and proved against it, it was denied the rites of sepulture, and left to rot, unlamented. Then, can any modern institutions excel the wisdom of the laws enacted by the Pharaohs? or can any modern magnificence equal that displayed in the cities of Memphis and Thebes? And since this will hardly be disputed, what country can be more fitting than that once so highly favoured, to be the scene of the most important discovery ever made by Man? Deride me if you will; I feel a superior power inspires my wishes. I feel irresistibly impelled forward. I feel called upon to act by a force far superior to my own, and I will obey its dictates. You smile, and secretly ridicule my projects; but remember that excessive incredulity sometimes savours as strongly of folly as credulity itself, and that both are alike injurious to the progress of science.”</p>
			<p>“I do not doubt it,” said Father Morris, with provoking coldness; “though it must certainly be allowed not to be the prevailing foible of the present day. However, without staying to discuss that point at present, I humbly suggest, that, as I happen unfortunately to be rather pressed for time, it may be as well to condescend to bestow a few minutes’ attention upon the best human means of enabling you to fulfil the high destinies that await you in Egypt⁠—as, notwithstanding the imperious nature of the impulse that invites you there, I presume you are aware that the vulgar agency of money will be necessary, as well as the scientific one of galvanism.”</p>
			<p>The feelings of Edric were too highly wrought to bear this irony; and, snatching up his hat, he rushed out of the room, casting a look of indignation at the priest, who vainly endeavoured to stop him. Maddened by the conflicting emotions that struggled in his bosom, and disgusted alike with himself, Father Morris, and all the world, Edric hurried on, totally unaware which way he was going, till his career was stopped by his coming suddenly and violently in contact with another person, who was running equally heedlessly with himself, but in an opposite direction. Both recoiled some paces from the shock, and Edric found, to his surprise, it was Abelard whom he had greeted so unceremoniously. Curiosity to know what could have occasioned the abstraction of the worthy butler, (he being generally remarkable for his peculiar attention to matters of ceremony,) diverted the thoughts of Edric from himself, and he, for the moment, forgot his own woes, whilst he inquired into those of Abelard.</p>
			<p>“Alas! alas!” said the old man, shaking his grey head, whilst the tears streamed in torrents down his wrinkled cheeks, “that I should ever have lived to see this day! Oh, Master Edric! how could you irritate your respectable progenitor? Alas! alas! I feel my lachrymal gland suffused almost to overflowing, whenever the recollection of what has passed shoots across my piamater.”</p>
			<p>“For Heaven’s sake! tell me what is the matter!”</p>
			<p>“Oh dear! oh dear!” sobbed the unhappy butler, “that such longevity should have been granted me only that I might see so promising a young gentleman turned out of doors.”</p>
			<p>“Tell me the worst; though, indeed, I now fear I comprehend your meaning but too well.”</p>
			<p>“Sir Ambrose commands that you depart immediately, and never enter again into the mansion of your paternal ancestors.”</p>
			<p>“What will become of me!” exclaimed Edric, clasping his hands together, and raising his eyes to Heaven; then, after a short pause, he added more composedly, “Well, come what will, I am resigned. Fate urges me onward with irresistible violence, and I feel it would be in vain to attempt to combat against her dictates. I, at least, am prepared to execute her will.”</p>
			<p>“But where will you go?” sobbed Abelard. “You will want money and friends. Alas! alas! that I should ever see the son of my old master stand in need of pecuniary assistance!”</p>
			<p>“He but repeats the words of Father Morris,” said Edric; “and yet how differently his doubts affect me. The irony of the priest drove me to despair, but the grief of this old man soothes my wounded spirit. He surely loves me.”</p>
			<p>These words were uttered in so faint a key, that the name of Father Morris only caught the ear of Abelard, and he replied:</p>
			<p>“I don’t like Father Morris, and I never did; though it is now twenty years since he first entered the family, and though I have never seen any thing in him to censure particularly, throughout the entire of that long period, yet my aversion remains undiminished. I suppose it must be a natural antipathy, and that the pores of my body don’t assimilate in shape with the atoms that emanate from his.”</p>
			<p>“He drove me almost to madness,” said Edric.</p>
			<p>“I am not surprised at that,” returned Abelard; “for I know he can take a fiend-like pleasure in tormenting. He can employ the most provoking, tantalizing expressions, and yet preserve the same soft, smooth voice, and keep his palebræ half closed, and his visual organs fixed upon the ground. Indeed, I never saw the iris of his eyes dilated in my life; and then he has such a manner of raising his supercilia, curving his nose, and drawing down his depressor anguli oris when he listens to any one or replies to them, as to give the expression of a perpetual sneer to his saturnine countenance.”</p>
			<p>Edric’s own recent personal experience bore testimony only too forcibly to the justice of those remarks; and as the wounded man shrinks from the slightest touch, so did Edric find the words of Abelard jar upon his nerves; as turning away from him to hide his emotions, he encountered the earnest gaze of Father Morris himself.</p>
			<p>“Why do you appear astonished?” said the priest, smiling. “You are an infant, Edric; you quarrel with your best friends, and then appear surprised that you do not find them as capricious as yourself. You fancy you are very angry with me, for instance, and yet I am not conscious of having done any thing to offend you. Was it a crime to attempt to moderate an enthusiasm that I feared might mislead you? was it a fault to warn you against the dangers of a world of which as yet you know so little? No, no; I am confident your own reason and excellent good sense will acquit me, if you will but suffer them to act. Your imagination is too vivid, Edric; it sweeps away all before it, like a torrent. If you would view things calmly, you would perceive your folly. The world will teach you wisdom. Go then, travel; experience personal privations and evils of every description, that you may learn to enjoy the pleasures that even now lie within your grasp, but which you spurn from you with contempt. So true it is that we never learn the real value of any blessing till we have experienced the misery that attends its privation.”</p>
			<p>“If this be the case,” replied Edric, soothed in spite of himself, by the insinuating manner of the monk, “why should my feelings be an exception to the general rule? And since all our pleasures acquire a new zest by the force of contrast, and mine have long since lost all relish, is it not even wisdom to try the effect of change?”</p>
			<p>“And yet it seems a folly,” said Father Morris, in his smooth, plausible, hypocritical voice, with his eyes again fixed upon the ground, “to incur a certain evil in the hope of attaining an uncertain good.”</p>
			<p>Edric started, and fixed his eyes upon him, with an expression the monk well understood; and, not wishing again to provoke him past endurance, he continued in a different tone: “But it is useless for age to preach lessons of prudence to youth, and as your father says, every one must purchase his own experience; so we will now, if you please, change the subject to that of making preparations for your journey. You are still determined to visit Egypt, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>“It is my most ardent wish.”</p>
			<p>“Return then to your own apartment, and by to-morrow all shall be ready for your departure.”</p>
			<p>“He must not enter the house!” said Abelard; “alas! alas! that I should live to say it! Sir Ambrose has forbidden him even to cross the threshold.”</p>
			<p>“Can you not remain concealed in the apartment of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Entwerfen?” asked Father Morris, after a short pause; “no one enters there but himself; and one of the windows looks upon this terrace, so that you may reach it unobserved; Abelard, I am confident, will not betray you; and I will accompany you, as I wish to consult with the doctor respecting your intended voyage.”</p>
			<p>Edric hastily assented, and bidding Abelard an affectionate adieu, he and Father Morris easily climbed through the window that led to the adytum of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Entwerfen, whilst Abelard, clasping his hands together, exclaimed as he retired, “God bless him! Well, he shall not want for pecuniary assistance at any rate, if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davis and I can help it; that is one comfort.”</p>
			<p>When Edric and Father Morris entered the study of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Entwerfen, they found him engaged in what, certainly considering his age and station, seemed a very extraordinary amusement. He was apparently dancing a hornpipe, drawing his heels together, and alternately rising and sinking like a clown in a pantomime, twisting his face, in the mean time, into the most hideous grimaces.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter?” cried Edric and Father Morris, both at the same instant, gazing at him with surprise.</p>
			<p>“I⁠—I⁠—I am galvanized,” cried the doctor, in a piteous tone; nodding his head with a sudden jerk, that seemed to threaten every instant to throw it out of its socket; and then, suddenly starting, he kicked out one leg horizontally, and twirled round upon the other with an air of an opera dancer.</p>
			<p>“How did it happen?” cried Edric, excessively shocked at the unnatural contrast exhibited between the doctor’s serious countenance, and involuntary antics.</p>
			<p>“I can’t⁠—exactly⁠—tell,” replied the doctor, bolting forth his words with difficulty, and still swimming, grinning, and capering, to the inexpressible horror of his companions, till by degrees his grimaces subsided, and he was enabled at last to stand tolerably steady. He now informed his friends, that trying some experiments with his galvanic battery, he had unfortunately operated upon himself; and in his turn listened to their account of what had passed between Edric and Sir Ambrose. Instead of expressing sorrow, however, when he found his pupil had quarrelled with his father, the doctor’s eyes sparkled with joy⁠—“Then you must inevitably travel,” exclaimed he. “We shall visit the pyramids, we shall animate the mummies, and we shall attain immortality.”</p>
			<p>There was something in this violent expression of the doctor’s transports that did not quite harmonize with Edric’s feelings, especially as he fancied he perceived a satirical smile lurking round the lips of Father Morris.</p>
			<p>“When shall you be ready to set off?” asked he abruptly.</p>
			<p>“To-morrow, if you will,” replied the doctor. “I have foreseen this result some time, and I have been preparing every thing accordingly. I never knew a young Englishman in my life, Father Morris, who was not fond of travelling. The inhabitants of other countries travel for what they can get, or what they hope to learn; but an Englishman travels because he does not know what to do with himself. He spares neither time, trouble, nor money; he goes every where, sees every thing; after which, he returns⁠—just as wise as when he set out. Not that I blame curiosity⁠—no⁠—I admire it above all things!⁠—it is that which has led to all the great discoveries that have been made since the creation of the world, and it is that which now impels us to explore the pyramids.”</p>
			<p>Edric looked excessively annoyed at the conclusion of this speech, and, to change the subject, hastily asked the doctor, if he thought his galvanic battery powerful enough for the experiment they meant to try with it.</p>
			<p>“Powerful!” exclaimed the doctor; “why I feel it even now tingling to my fingers’ ends. I should think, Sir, the effect it has had upon me is a sufficient proof of the force of the machine.”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly!” replied Father Morris; “nay, if we are to judge by that, I only tremble lest you should animate the pyramids as well as the mummies, and you must allow it would be an awkward sight to see them come tumbling and slipping along the plain.”</p>
			<p>“Sir!” said the doctor, staring at him.</p>
			<p>“Do you intend visiting any other country than Egypt?” asked Father Morris, fearful he had gone too far, and wishing, for reasons he did not openly avow, not to offend his companions.</p>
			<p>“I should like to see India,” said the doctor; “some black-letter pamphlets in my possession, allude to its being once governed by an old woman; and as the regular historians make no mention of the fact, I should like to see what traditions I could gather respecting it on the spot. The religion of the ancient Hindoos, before they were converted to Christianity, has been said to have resembled that of the ancient Egyptians; by comparing the monuments of both, one might be made to illustrate the other. I should also like, before we quit Africa, to see the celebrated court of Timbuctoo. I have long been in correspondence with a learned pundit there, who has communicated to me some of the most sublime discoveries.”</p>
			<p>“The whole of the interior of Africa must be interesting,” observed Father Morris, “particularly the rising states on the banks of the Niger. It is generally instructive as well as amusing to watch the birth and struggles of infant republics; and to remark first how fast the people encroach, and then the governors. Whilst the rulers are weak, they are always liberal; but their exalted sentiments in general decrease in exact proportion as they become powerful.”</p>
			<p>“In short,” resumed the doctor, “I would willingly traverse the whole world; I know but one country that I should dislike to visit.”</p>
			<p>“And which is that?” asked Edric.</p>
			<p>“America,” replied the doctor. “I have no wish to have my throat cut, or my breath stopped by a bowstring. I have a perfect horror of despotic governments.”</p>
			<p>“Then how do you endure the one we live under?” asked Father Morris.</p>
			<p>“The case is quite different,” returned the doctor. “With us, the spur of despotism is scarcely felt; and the people, being permitted occasionally to think and act for themselves, are not debased and brutalized as the slaves of absolute power are in general. Despotism, with us, is like a rod which the schoolmaster keeps hung up in sight of his boys, but which he has very seldom any occasion to make use of. From such despotism as that of the Americans, however, Heaven defend us!”</p>
			<p>“Amen!” said Edric; “for, as we are happy now, we should be idiots to desire a change.”</p>
			<p>“What an unphilosophical sentiment!” exclaimed the doctor: “I am really quite shocked that you, Edric, should utter such a speech. What an abominable doctrine! Remember, that if you once allow innovation to be dangerous, you instantly put a stop to all improvement⁠—you absolutely shut and bolt your doors against it. Oh! it is horrible, that such a doctrine should be ever broached in a civilized country. You could not surely be aware of what you were saying?”</p>
			<p>“To-morrow,” said Father Morris, addressing Edric, and without noticing the indignation of the learned doctor, “you must proceed to town, where you can remain at the house of a friend of mine, till you are ready for your voyage to Egypt. I would not, however, advise you to stay long before you go there; for, as your father intends visiting London in a day or two, you might meet, and the consequences, be unpleasant. I have already dispatched a carrier-pigeon to advise my friend, Lord Gustavus De Montfort, of your arrival; he, I am sure, will give you a hearty welcome, and not only afford you the shelter of his house, but afford you all the assistance in his power, to enable you to make preparations for your journey; for which purpose, also, I will take care to supply you with money. No thanks,” continued he, stopping Edric, who was about to speak, “I detest them. If you really feel obliged to me, you will prove it by remaining silent. I must leave you now, as my longer absence might create suspicion. Adieu! God bless you! A balloon will wait for you to-morrow morning, at the corner of the wood. The doctor will, of course, accompany you. I think you may safely rest here concealed till then. Once more, adieu!”</p>
			<p>“Now Father Morris is gone,” said Doctor Entwerfen to his pupil, “I have a treat for you. I will show you a curious collection of ballads, all of which are at least three hundred years old, which a friend of mine picked up in London for me the other day, and sent me down this morning by the stage-balloon. They are all of the genuine rag paper, a certain proof of their antiquity; for, you know, the asbestos paper we now use has not been invented more than two hundred years. But you shall see them: follow me.”</p>
			<p>So saying, the doctor trotted off to his library, that paradise of half-forgotten volumes, most of which had been accidentally saved from their well-merited destination of covering over butter, and wrapping up cheese, to be drawn from the dust and obscurity in which they had lain for centuries, to ornament the shelves of Doctor Entwerfen; and whose authors, if they could have taken a peep upon earth, and beheld them, would have been quite astonished to find themselves immortal. Entering this emporium of neglected learning, the doctor hastily advanced to a table, on which lay his newly acquired treasures, and holding them up, exclaimed, “Look, Edric, how beautifully dirty the paper is; no art could counterfeit this dingy hue. This sooty tinge is the genuine tint of antiquity. You know, Edric, in ancient times, the caloric employed in culinary purposes, and indeed for all the common usages of life, was produced by the combustion of wood, and of a black bituminous substance, or amphilites, drawn from the bowels of the earth, called coal, of which you may yet see specimens in the cabinets of the curious. As these substances decomposed, or rather expanded, by the force of heat, the attraction of cohesion was dissolved, and the component parts flew off in the shape of smoke or soot. This smoke, rising into the air, was dispersed by it, and the minute particles, or atoms, of which it was composed, falling and resting upon every thing that chanced to be in their way, produced that incomparable dusky hue, which the moderns have so often tried, though in vain, to imitate. I beg your pardon, Edric, for using such vulgar language to express what I wished to say, but really, treating upon such a subject, I did not know how to explain myself elegantly.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! I understood you very well, Sir. After all, the only true use of language is to convey the ideas of one person to the understanding of another; and, provided that end be attained, I really do not see that it is of any consequence what words we make use of.”</p>
			<p>“True, Edric dear! you make very just observations sometimes. Well, but the ballads; I was going to show you my treasures⁠—my jewels! as the Roman lady said of her children. Look what beautiful specimens these are! A little torn here and there, and with a few of the lines illegible⁠—but genuine antiques. I’ll warrant every one of them above three hundred years old. Look, it is real linen paper; you may tell it by the texture; and then the spelling, see what a number of letters they put into their words that were of no use. Look at the titles of them. Here is the ‘Tragical end of poor Miss Bailey’⁠—and here ‘Cherry Ripe’⁠—and ‘I’ve been roaming.’ Here is ‘The loves of Captain Wattle and Miss Roe’⁠—and here are ‘Jessy the flower of Dumblane,’ and ‘Dunois the brave.’ But this is my Phœnix⁠—here is what will be the envy of collectors! here is my invaluable treasure. This, I believe, is absolutely unique, and that I am so blest as to possess the only copy extant. The date is wanting, but the manners it describes are so unpolished, that I should almost think it might be traced back to the times of the aboriginal Britons.⁠—Thus it begins:⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">‘At Wednesbury there was a cocking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">A match between Newton and Scroggins;</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The nailers and colliers left work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And to Spittle’s they all went jogging.</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 6.5em;">Tol de rol lol.’</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>I used to be very much puzzled at this burthen, which is one of frequent recurrence in ancient songs. At first, I thought it a relic of some language now irrevocably lost. Then it struck me, it might be an invocation to the deities of the aborigines. In short, I was quite perplexed, and knew not what to think, when a learned friend of mine hit upon an idea the other day, which seems completely to solve the difficulty. He suggests that it was an ancient manner of running up and down the scale; and that ‘Tol de rol lol’ had the same signification as ‘Do re mi fa;’⁠—which solution is at once so simple and ingenious, that I am sure you, as well as myself, must be struck by it. I here omit a few stanzas, in which the author enumerates his heroes exactly in the Homeric manner. The names are so barbarous, that I am afraid of loosening my teeth in pronouncing them:⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">‘There was plenty of beef at the dinner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Of a bull that was baited to death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Bunny Hyde got a lump in his throat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Which had like to have stopt his breath.’</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>What a beautiful simplicity there is in that last line,</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">‘Which had like to have stopt his breath.’</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>Oh, we moderns have nothing equal to it!⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">‘The company fell in confusion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">To see this poor Bunny Hyde choke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">So they hurried him down to the kitchen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And held his head over the smoke.’</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>“This develops a curious practice of antiquity. You know, Edric, I explained to you just now the manner in which combustion was formerly effected, and the causes of the production of what was called smoke. I own, however, it seems a strange way of reviving a half-suffocated man, to hold his head over smoke, which, being loaded, as I said before, with innumerable atoms of all sorts and sizes, would, one might think be more likely to impede respiration than restore it. The fact, however, is undoubted; and it not only affords a curious illustration of the manner of the ancients, but is of itself a strong proof of the authenticity of the ballad; for such an idea never could have entered the head of a modern. To return to poor Hyde⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">‘One gave him a kick o’ th’ stomach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And another a thump o’ th’ brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">His wife cried throw him i’ th’ stable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And he will be better just now.’</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>This unfeeling conduct of his wife does not say much in commendation of the ladies of those times. Here follows an hiatus of several stanzas: I find, however, by a word or two here and there, that they celebrated the exploits of two gallic heroes:⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">‘The best i’ th’ country bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The one was a brassy-wing black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And the other a dusky-wing’d red.’</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>These unfortunate victims of the cruelty of man seem both to have perished. There is a stanza, however, before this catastrophe, which seems to relate to the combat.</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">‘The conflict was hard upon each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Till glossy-wing’d blacky was choked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The colliers were nationally vex’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And the nailers were all provoked.’</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>This passage seems very obscure: ‘Nationally’ is evidently a sign of comparison, but I cannot say I ever saw it employed before. It is, however, another proof of the amazing antiquity of the ballad. After this, it appears that the people broke in upon the ring, and both cocks were crushed to atoms. I don’t know whether you are acquainted with the manner in which these gallic combats were conducted, Edric. A kind of amphitheatre was formed, upon which the birds were pitted one against the other, whence the name cock-pit. The combatants were armed with large iron spurs, and the victor generally left his rival dead upon the field. The ballad proceeds:⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">‘The cock-pit was near to the church,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">As an ornament to the town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">One side was an old coal-pit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And the other was well gorsed round.’</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>Gorse was a kind of heath or furze.</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">‘Peter Hadley peep’d through the gorse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">In order to see the cocks fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Spittle jobb’d his eye out with a fork,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And said, “Blast you, it sarves you right.” ’</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>This is very spirited and expressive, though the false quantities render it difficult to read.</p>
			<p>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">‘Some folks may think this is strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Who Wednesbury never knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But those who have ever been there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Won’t have the least doubt but it’s true.</span>
				<br/>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">For they are all savage by nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And guilty of deeds that are shocking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Jack Baker he whack’d his own feyther,</span>
				<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And so ended the Wednesbury cocking.’ ”</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>“It is very fine certainly,” said Edric, who was half asleep.</p>
			<p>“Upon my word,” returned the doctor, “I don’t think you have heard a single word I have been saying.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! yes, I have,” replied Edric, “every syllable. It was about a man killing his own father, and putting his eyes out with a fork.”</p>
			<p>“Eh?” cried the doctor, somewhat annoyed at this unequivocal proof that though his words might have struck upon the auricular organs of his pupil, they had not reached his brains. The exclamation of the doctor restored Edric to his senses, and he began to apologize.</p>
			<p>“I am really very sorry,” said he, “but you must excuse my inattention. Sometimes, you know, the mind is not in tune for literary discussions, even when proceeding from the most eloquent lips. This is my case at the present moment. My mind is so occupied by the important change that has just taken place in my affairs, that, I own, even your learning and eloquence were thrown away upon me.”</p>
			<p>“If that be the state of your mind,” replied the doctor, with chagrin, “it is of no use to show you any more of my literary treasures; else I have some of matchless excellence. Here is a letter addressed to Sheridan, a witty writer of comedies, in the eighteenth century, which has never been opened⁠—and here is a tailor’s bill of the immortal Byron, which may possibly never have been looked at. But here is the most inestimable of my relics. Look, at least, at this. This piece of paper, covered carelessly with irregular strokes and lines, was once in the possession of that enchanting, that inimitable novelist of the nineteenth century, generally distinguished in the works of contemporary writers by the mysterious title of ‘The Great Unknown!’ See, here is half the word ‘Waverley,’ written upon it, and doubtless all these other irregular marks and scratches proceeded directly from his pen. I confess, Edric, I never contemplate this relic of genius without a feeling of reverence, and almost of awe. ‘Perhaps,’ say I to myself, when I look at it, ‘when these letters were formed, the first idea had but just arisen in the mind of the author of those immortal works, which were afterwards destined to improve and delight mankind. Perhaps, at that very moment gigantic thoughts were rushing through his brain, and a variety of new ideas opening their treasures to his imagination.’ Oh, there is something in the mere random stroke of the pen of a celebrated character, inexpressibly affecting to the mind;⁠—it carries one back to the very time when he lived⁠—it seems to make one acquainted with him, and to let us into the secrets of his inmost thoughts. But I see you are not attending to me, Edric!”</p>
			<p>“I am very sorry⁠—another time I should be happy⁠—but now⁠—I cannot. However, when we return, perhaps⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It may be then too late,” said the doctor, with solemnity; and locking up his cabinet, he led the way back to his common sitting-room, in high dudgeon.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
